












******** MMaaiinn NNaavviiggaattiioonn ********
    * _H_o_m_e_ _P_a_g_e
    * _I_n_c_e_p_t_i_o_n
    * _E_n_o_u_g_h_ _A_b_o_u_t_ _M_e
    * _T_e_r_m_i_n_o_l_o_g_y
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e_ _R_e_v_i_s_i_t_e_d
    * _B_a_t_e_s_ _A_u_t_o_p_s_y
    * _A_u_t_o_p_s_y_ _C_o_n_f_e_s_s_i_o_n
    * _B_u_t_t_e_r_f_i_e_l_d_ _P_D_F
    * _H_o_r_a_n_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e_ _A
    * _H_o_r_a_n_ _R_e_v_i_s_i_t_e_d
    * _M_o_s_t_l_y_ _M_o_r_f
    * _V_o_i_c_e_ _B_o_x
    * _D_a_v_e_ _O_r_a_n_c_h_a_k
    * _S_t_r_i_n_g_ _T_h_e_o_r_y
Zodiac Killer Timeline
************ HHoorraann TTiimmeelliinnee ************
I happened to be reading the Thomas Horan articles on Zodiac Revisited, and I
remembered having responded to some of Horan's points when they were posted on
ZKF back in April.  Since most of the posters on ZodiacRevisited.com read this
website, I thought I'd reprint part of an article I put up on
ZodiacKillerFactsInfo.com back then.

With all due respect to G. Gluckman, tricking Horan into saying his name
backward won't work.  It worked with Mr. Mxyzptlk, because what that pesky
sprite conjured was real magic (it also worked with God himself, in the great
cult movie WWaarrlloocckk).  Logic says if you're under the influence of a SPELL, you
can reverse it by SPELLING the sorcerer's name backward and getting him to read
it aloud.

I'm doubting Thomas has any such powers; he's more a street huckster selling
sideshow spiel.

You put him out of business by showing the crimped corners of his crooked deck.

This won't take long.

Horan claims that The Writer (October 13, 1969) demonstrates that he knows
nothing about the murder by citing the corner of Washington & Maple in the
first Presidio Heights letter, when the crime occurred at Washington & Cherry.

The opposite is true.  "Washington & Maple" is what Paul Stine wrote in his
trip book.  The Writer is, in fact, showing that he knows what the original
destination given to the cab driver was.

If The Writer was not also The Killer, he'd have written "Washington & Cherry"
in the letter.  The police report and the original newspaper accounts mention
"Washington & Cherry", not "Washington & Maple".  No police confederate of The
Writer would have been aware of the trip book entry, either, because no one
would have assumed that the trip book entry would differ from the actual crime
scene location.  The only ones "on the inside" who would have been aware of the
discrepancy were Toschi and Armstrong, the two detectives assigned to the case
. . . so is Horan claiming that either Toschi or Armstrong was supplying The
Writer with his inside information?  Two-man detective teams are notoriously
closed-mouthed about progress they're making on a case (as Mark Ruffalo/Toschi
demonstrates in a lunch counter scene with Jake Gyllenhaal/Graysmith in
Fincher's ZZooddiiaacc).

If that isn't enough of a stretch for you, let's pull out the shirt tail.     

The faking of the letters depends on someone on the inside, a police
confederate of The Writer, somehow gaining access to Paul Stines shirt. I
continue to wait for Mr. Horan to explain how that could have been done.  Keep
in mind that no one processing the shirt would have been aware that it might
have been cut by the killer; they would have noticed that the shirt tail was
cut off, but would have assumed that that had happened prior to, and in a
manner unconnected with, the murder.

We have photos of the shirt as it looked after it was removed from the body at
the morgue. Fully half the back of the shirt was chopped off. For The Writers
confederate to cut the shirt, hed have to have done it either prior to the
body arriving at the morgue, or immediately prior to the bodys being processed
at the morgue. Horan isnt forthcoming about who might have done this, but its
a short list of potential suspects:

1. Officer Armond Pelissetti
2. Officer Frank Peda
3. Morgue Steward Doucette
4. Inspector Walt Kracke
5. Inspector Dave Toschi

Only those five people had access to the body prior to its arrival at the
morgue, with Frank Peda being the most likely of the five, since he was left
alone at the cab when Pelissetti went walking down Cherry Street.  I can't
imagine that Frank Peda, if he was in cahoots with The Writer, would have taken
the chance of getting into the front of the cab and hacking off the tail of
Paul Stine's shirt.  Witnesses were present (the teenagers who saw the killer),
more were collecting at the corner (since the police car was parked in the
middle of the intersection), and handling the body would mean leaving his own
prints in the front seat.

Morgue stewards typically work in two-man tandems, and the body is bagged and
strapped and rolled into the back of the van and then locked down.  Cutting off
the victim's shirt tail would have been problematical, to say the least.  The
body would be by itself for the trip to the morgue, but both stewards would
normally ride in the front seat.

6. an anonymous morgue employee

What are the chances that The Writers confederate was a morgue employee? The
only employee with a conceivable motive to hack the shirt would be a medical
examiner or the coroner; anyone lower than that would not likely be The
Writers confederate, since his value prior to the murder would have been
negligible. If The Writers confederate is a morgue professional, why would The
Writer have begun with the murders in Vallejo and Napa? Wouldnt a disgruntled
medical examiner have provided material from other, more anonymous murders from
the San Francisco area, preferably John Does?

The other problem with the shirt fragments is that The Writer had been sending
his letters in The Bay Area since July, and none of the newspapers had
suggested that the letters themselves were hoaxes. So why take the additional
chance of bringing a confederate aboard when theres no need to do that?
Sending the shirt fragments is a major step up from just providing crime scene
details; it puts both The Writer and his confederate at a very serious risk of
obstruction of justice, one he doesnt have to take based on the previous
acceptance of the letters. So why do it?

But the strongest argument against the shirt being hacked by anyone other than
the killer is the timing.  Paul Stine is murdered on Saturday, October 11,
1969; The Writer mails his first Presidio Heights letter on Monday, October 13,
1969.  If a month had gone by between the murder and the first letter (as
happened, for example, in Riverside), one could argue that The Writer waited
until it became clear that police were probably not going to solve the murder.

For The Writer to mail the bloody fragment a mere two days after the murder,
he's taking a tremendous chance that the Stine murder will not be solved AFTER
police receive the letter with the shirt swatch.  If it is, down the toilet
goes all his work on The Cryptogram.  The Cryptogram cover letters are mailed
many months after the Lake Herman Road murders, and almost a full month after
the Blue Rock Springs murder.  And The Writer never says anything about the
Lake Berryessa attack.

A cabbie murderer is the personification of a disorganized killer.  So why
would such an elaborate hoaxer go to all the trouble of obtaining a piece of a
victim's bloody shirt . . . and then risk exposure of his hoax by sending that
swatch 48 hours after the murder?  It's not as if he wasn't going to write
about the murder in more detail--he does just that almost a month later.

It doesn't make sense.

Of course, Horan's Hypothesis never did.    
Content copyright
. ZODIACKILLERTIMELINE.COM. All rights reserved.
_[_W_e_b_ _H_o_s_t_i_n_g_]
