















The Zodiac Murders--Solved!
my other website: _Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _K_i_l_l_e_r_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e
you tube videos:_Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _k_i_l_l_e_r_ _s_o_l_v_e_d
Your Subtitle text
    * _H_o_m_e_ _P_a_g_e
    * _I_n_t_r_o_ _S_e_c_t_i_o_n
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e
    * _V_a_l_l_e_j_o
    * _C_r_y_p_t_o_g_r_a_m
    * _L_a_k_e_ _B_e_r_r_y_e_s_s_a
    * _P_r_e_s_i_d_i_o_ _H_e_i_g_h_t_s
    * _S_h_e_l_l_y_ _H_o_l_m_b_o_e
    * _3_4_0
    * _J_o_h_n_s_ _&_ _S_a_l_e_m
    * _1_9_7_0_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _D_o_n_n_a_ _L_a_s_s
    * _1_9_7_4
    * _1_9_8_0_/_1_9_8_1
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _A_r_t_i_c_l_e_s
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_1
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_2
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_4
    * _W_h_a_t_'_s_ _N_e_w
                           ************ DDoonnnnaa LLaassss ************

I&#8217;m grouping the Donna Lass murder with the two October 1970 mailings and
the two March 1971 mailings because the letters are mainly about the murder,
even though we don&#8217;t know exactly how it happened.

The Donna Lass murder is, in many ways, the Zodiac&#8217;s signature crime. How
can the murder of a &#8220;secret&#8221; victim many people don&#8217;t even
associate with the Zodiac possibly be his &#8220;signature&#8221; crime? That
is actually the point.

Quick: What's the largest man-made structure in the world?

Answer: The Atlantic Wall!

Why doesn't everyone know the answer to that question?

Because most of it isn't visible! Major sections of The Atlantic Wall consist
of mining, both underground and underwater, and buried infrastructure.

If the biggest man-made thing in the world can somehow escape everyone's
attention because it's not directly out in front of people, maybe the world's
most notorious serial killer could bury a victim in a public park, in plain
sight, in the middle of the day, employing a pick, shovel, and a couple hours
worth of subterfuge?

In the midst of his grand design, the Zodiac has placed a victim whose murder
happened offstage, whose character is barely established beyond being a fairly
typical abductee, whose employment at the Sahara Hotel was so casual that the
casino didn&#8217;t even replace her after she disappeared, and whose identity,
if her body is ever found, can only be established through a relatively recent
method (DNA) of identification, BECAUSE SHE HAD NO DENTAL RECORDS. Even the
computerized system for Jane Does would not be able to identify her.

And yet, it is Donna Lass who is at the epicenter of the Zodiac&#8217;s design,
whose very life straddled the border between our world and the Zodiac&#8217;s,
and the location of whose remains, more than four decades after burial, may
still break the case wide open.

The Zodiac Project is a locked puzzle.

And Donna Lass is the key to its solution.

Donna Lass Facts

When true crime magazine shows such as 48 Hours or Cold Case (the A&E network
show, NOT the CBS network drama) depict a murder, they usually spend the first
15-20 minutes recounting events in the life of the victim, his last day of
life, her final hours, the mundane routine that was interrupted by death.

In the case of the Zodiac&#8217;s signature victim, that retelling would only
take a few seconds. Her life was centered around her job as a registered nurse,
her death was almost literally a blank page, and her disappearance created so
little stir that almost a month went by before anyone noticed it . . . though
this was largely due to the Zodiac&#8217;s skill at covering it up.

On Sunday, September 6, 1970, Donna Lass, 25, was working as a nurse at The
Sahara Casino in Stateline, Nevada, around 2am, possibly making a note in her
logbook while sitting in her office, when she disappeared. Her last entry
trailed off on the page . . .

At the time, no one was even aware of what had happened, since Donna worked
alone in a small office that no one else used.

There was no outcry and no sign of foul play.

An unidentified male caller contacted both Donna&#8217;s landlord and her
employer within 24 hours of the disappearance, and said she would not be
returning because of an illness in the family.

There was no such illness.

Donna&#8217;s family was from South Dakota.

Donna Lass lived in South Lake Tahoe, California and worked in Stateline,
Nevada. Her life, in geographic terms, straddled the California/Nevada border.

She had disappeared without a trace, and almost without notice.


Previous Points

To reiterate points made previously in this book:

1. The Donna Lass murder is predicted by the TIMEX watch time of 12:22. The
Zodiac leaves a Wrist Watch (W-W) at the Riverside crime scene, and Gareth Penn
says that the stopped watch reads &#8220;12:22&#8221;.



12:22 is the clock face time at the California/Nevada border.



The time of 12:22 will also appear on another artifact later in this book.

2. Because of the need to invoke the pagan sacrifice ritual, the Zodiac killed
people whose names suggested virginity (CHERI Bates) or who could somehow be
associated with a word that suggests virginity (Paul Stine being redirected one
block west of Maple to CHERRY Street).

LASS is another name for a virginal girl.

3. Donna Lass is buried at 739 Clay Street in Chinatown.

When I say she&#8217;s buried at 739 Clay Street, I mean she&#8217;s buried
there RIGHT NOW. I mean her bones are there, under the ground, RIGHT NOW and
they can be located and dug up and identified via DNA.

Unfortunately, the authorities are reluctant to take my word for that.

So let&#8217;s start by explaining why I think it.


Radian Clue 2

Why do I think the Zodiac buried Donna Lass at 739 Clay Street?

Let&#8217;s start with the radian.

Remember what Gareth Penn said about the most important design element of The
Zodiac Project&#8212;symmetry.

What you see In The Beginning, you see at The End.

What you see on one side, you see on the other side.

All of which is to illustrate the elemental symmetry of 23/23.

If you look at the radian, you will note, however, that there is one murder
site on the south leg and two on the north.



The design prerequisites of The Zodiac Project dictate otherwise.

So there has to be another point on that south leg.


Benchmark Location

If you have a general location to search, and aren&#8217;t exactly sure where
to look, what clue would pinpoint a spot in The Zodiac Project?

Gareth Penn spends a good part of his book Times 17, not to mention much of his
previous and subsequent output, discussing the importance of USGS benchmarks to
The Zodiac Project.

After all, the Zodiac uses VABM 3849 as the basis for the radian itself.

And the crosshairs sign of the Zodiac is the symbol used by engineers to
indicate measurements at building sites, including altimeter readings.

So&#8212;are there any USGS benchmarks on that south leg?

Oddly enough, two of them are listed on USGS topographic maps. But BM 8 near
The Embarcadero was destroyed before The Zodiac Project got under way.

The remaining USGS Benchmark on that south leg is BM 54, located at 739 Clay
Street in San Francisco&#8217;s Chinatown.

When I had a photographer from The San Francisco Examiner, John Storey, take
pictures of the area for me in 1990, he came up with this photograph, embedded
here in a page from my book with the USGS data for BM8 and BM54:



I immediately realized that Dragon Plaza might have suggested The Little Dragon
Card. I would, sometime later, be able to connect the word DRAGON to the
pasted-on PUMPKIN from The Halloween Card.

So that&#8217;s where her body has to be buried.

Now . . . has the Zodiac dug up her body in the meantime?

He may have. As I will suggest in a future chapter, he dug Joan Webster&#8217;s
body up from its original burial spot in Chinatown because he wasn&#8217;t able
to complete The Boston Triangle.

On the other hand, the Bay Area radian was &#8220;finished&#8221; with the
placing of Donna Lass&#8217;s body. So it&#8217;s possible he feels he has to
leave it there as a matter of artistic integrity.

The bad news is, SFPD and the city of San Francisco won&#8217;t let me use a
GPR machine to search for the body&#8217;s location.

The good news is, the body&#8217;s probably still there.


89449

Remember, Donna Lass&#8217;s life straddled the California/Nevada border.

She lived in South Lake Tahoe, California and worked in Stateline, Nevada.

The zip code of Stateline, Nevada is 89449.

8899 44 44 99

The last three numbers are all squares.

8899 2222 2222 3322

89449 is another way of saying Day 223 of Year 89.

Day 223 of 1989 is Friday, August 11, 1989.

The date of The Terminus Event.


Hole Card

The San Francisco Chronicle received a card the first week of October, 1970
which featured punched holes.



Initially the card was considered a Zodiac mailing, but then it was eliminated
as a &#8220;copycat&#8221; effort (maybe sent by the same people who did the
Robert Salem murder?).

I have a theory that each Zodiac mailing was intended to have a title, and that
the creators of The Zodiac Project anticipated each letter being given a name
to differentiate it from the others (&#8220;The Cryptogram Cover
Letters&#8221;, &#8220;The &#8216;This Is The Zodiac Speaking&#8217;
Letter&#8221;, &#8220;The School Bus Threat Letter&#8221;, and so forth).

If you just killed someone, and intended to bury her somewhere out on the
landscape, what would be your next move?

You&#8217;d have to dig a hole, correct?

So the title of this mailing might have been, &#8220;The Hole Card&#8221;, and
that is, in fact, how people talking about the case usually refer to it.

It was meant to dramatize the burial of Donna Lass at 739 Clay Street, since it
is the Zodiac event that most immediately followed her murder.

Note that the card features a date&#8212;October 5, 1970. It is the only Zodiac
mailing that is dated by the sender. I suspect this is because October 5, 1970
was the actual date of the burial.

How could anyone bury a body in a public place without being stopped and/or
questioned? I&#8217;ve never tried it, but I don&#8217;t imagine it would be
all that difficult, particularly for a Caucasian in Chinatown in October 1970,
as long as you wore one of those orange vests (the vests wouldn&#8217;t have to
be official issue CALTRANS vests, you could probably fake that part).

All you would have to do is wait until the last moment to bring the body
around, so you didn&#8217;t get caught with it if the authorities showed up and
asked what you were doing.

The cross on the card, reminiscent of the ankhs left at the Robert Salem murder
scene, was supposedly drawn in human blood.

If DNA is available (not likely), it could be compared with the profiles of
various Zodiac victims. The most likely donor, however, would be Robert Salem.

In the meantime, let&#8217;s assume the Zodiac realized that each of his
mailings would be given a title by the public, and that the title of the
October 5, 1970 mailing would be: &#8220;The Hole Card&#8221;

What IS a hole card, anyway?

A hole card is the card dealt first in stud poker, face down on the table, with
the other four cards dealt face up beside it. There is also a hole card in
blackjack, but I think the intended allusion here was to stud poker, since
there were ten individual Zodiac victims.

So let&#8217;s deal a hand symmetrically, for TWO players, which consists of
those ten victims:

CChheerrii BBaatteess BBeettttyy LLoouu JJeennsseenn

I&#8217;m linking the Riverside victim with the collateral victim at Lake
Herman Road because they haven&#8217;t been recognized with the others.

DDaavviidd FFaarraaddaayy DDaarrlleennee FFeerrrriinn

The Vallejo drivers were paired by the Zodiac, so we&#8217;ll pair them here.

CCeecceelliiaa SShheeppaarrdd PPaauull SSttiinnee

The Lake Berryessa victim and the Presidio Heights victim were linked as the
Zodiac&#8217;s last two &#8220;public&#8221; victims.

SShheellllyy HHoollmmbbooee RRoobbeerrtt SSaalleemm

Shelly Holmboe establishes VABM3849, since her body was found along The Mt.
Diablo Meridian. Robert Salem is the reason the Zodiac says
&#8216;radians&#8217; instead of &#8216;radian&#8217;, since his body is found
on a sub-radian off the south leg of The Mt. Diablo Radian.

That&#8217;s 8 cards, which leaves two left in the deal. In keeping with a
killer who signs his name with a &#8216;Z&#8217;, the Zodiac deals the cards
backwards, with the LAST two victims face down:

DDoonnnnaa LLaassss JJooaann WWeebbsstteerr

Donna Lass is buried in Chinatown in San Francisco (in Portsmouth Square Park,
to be precise); Joan Webster was buried in Chinatown in Boston (at Kneeland
Road and I-93, an interstate exit since obliterated by The Big Dig).

The first eight victims of The Zodiac Project were found FACE UP. Not
literally&#8212;Cheri Bates&#8217;s post-mortem pictures suggest she was face
down on the ground, for example, and though Paul Stine was left face up on the
front seat of his cab, there&#8217;s no suggestion here that the Zodiac
attempted to arrange the bodies of his victims after killing them. But the
first eight victims were &#8220;face up&#8221; in the sense of being
immediately apparent as victims and immediately identifiable.

Donna Lass and Joan Webster are The Hole Cards of The Zodiac Project, the last
two victims who were dealt FACE DOWN.

They were, in other words, BURIED.

The next mailing continues this theme.


Dead Man's Hand

By the way, since I just mentioned the Zodiac's allusion to stud poker, I don't
want to be accused by my critics of suddenly bringing in a reference to playing
cards out of the blue.

There is at least one other allusion to poker in The Zodiac Project.

As I mentioned just above, the zip code of Stateline, Nevada, 89449, is a
reference to The Terminus Event, the date on which the Zodiac intended to go
out with a very big bang.

On Friday, August 11, 1989, the Zodiac intended a double event in Greater
Boston, consisting of a BLAST at The MIT Tower (Building 54) in Cambridge,
followed by a sniper event similar to that of Charles Whitman's Texas Tower
murders in 1966.

Another way of saying this is that Michael O'Hare intended to be Master of His
Own Fate (semantically impossible) by dealing himself a "Dead Man's Hand" on
Friday, August 11, 1989.

AAuugguusstt 1111,, 11998899 == 88--1111--8899

We know that the Zodiac uses the number 9 to stand for the 9th letter of the
alphabet, 'I'.

88--1111--8899 == 88111188 99

Which gives us the numerical statement

"8118 am I."

If you look up "Dead Man's Hand" on Wikipedia, you'll see this illustration:




Halloween Card

On October 27, 1970, the Zodiac mailed his third commercial greeting card to
The San Francisco Chronicle&#8217;s Paul Avery.



The Halloween Card was part of the Secret Pal theme of greeting cards, which
the Zodiac would use again in December 1990.



Note that there are two skeletons attached to the card.

One is on the cover&#8212;it&#8217;s fixed, and part of the original artwork.

The second is spot-pasted inside the card and can still move around.

I believe the two skeletons are meant to represent the bodies of those two
&#8220;hole cards&#8221; of The Zodiac Project&#8212;Donna Lass and Joan
Webster.

The skeleton on the cover is fixed because Donna Lass is already dead on
October 27, 1970.

The skeleton inside can still move around because it stands for Joan Webster,
who still has eleven years to live at the time of the mailing (October 27,
1970) since she will be murdered at age 25 on November 28, 1981.

Note that the phrase inside the card, PEEK-A-BOO! YOU ARE DOOMED! does NOT
refer to Paul Avery, who was the addressee. The person who is doomed is Joan
Webster.

Note the odd similarity between skeletons:

The cover skeleton has the number 14 on its hand; the inside skeleton has
&#8216;4-TEEN&#8217; written on the card itself just above it.

Since the front skeleton represents Donna Lass, and she is already dead, it may
be said to be sending a message to us from beyond, in the hand gesturing in the
"OK" sign, in this case about the skeleton INSIDE the card, Joan Webster.

Joan Webster was born on August 19,1956, and, like Donna Lass, would be 25 when
she was abducted and murdered on November 28, 1981.

On October 27, 1970, she was 14 (4-TEEN) years old.

Note, parenthetically, that the skeleton holds up three fingers on the hand
with the &#8217;14&#8217;, thus once again evoking pi (3.14).

But another detail about the cover skeleton is even more striking.


Pumpkin

A number of self-appointed psychologists have pointed to the paper pumpkin the
Zodiac pasted over the crotch of the cover skeleton.



THAT, they say, means the author of the card is Sexually Repressed.

It&#8217;s high time the clock struck midnight on this interpretation!

I&#8217;m not privy to Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s sexual predilections, but I
think he pasted the paper pumpkin over the skeleton&#8217;s crotch for reasons
having nothing to do with sex or repression (or psychology, for that matter).

I know my critics are allergic to Morse/binary, so I try to avoid using it
wherever possible, but let&#8217;s do a Morse/binary analysis of PUMPKIN:

PP UU MM PP KK II NN
00111100 000011 1111 00111100 110011 0000 1100 == 440088,,440022

PUMPKIN is 408,402, which is

9 x 9 x 2 x 22552211

DD RR AA GG OO NN
110000 001100 0011 111100 111111 1100 == 3355,,229944

DRAGON is 35,294, which, oddly enough, is

7 x 2 x 22552211

Both words&#8212;PUMPKIN and DRAGON&#8212;contain the prime factor 2521!

What are the chances of that happening by accident, by the way?

What are the chances that TWO terms, both used prominently by the Zodiac killer
(PUMPKIN, which is what is pasted on the cover skeleton of The Halloween Card,
and DRAGON, the major theme of the Zodiac&#8217;s Little DRAGON Card) BOTH
contain the prime factor 2521 when converted to Morse/binary?

Let me put it this way: The chances that the names of the two drivers in
Vallejo, David Faraday and Darlene Ferrin, BOTH contained EASTER in Morse code
(about 1 in 2500) are still exponentially greater than the chances of the same
4-digit PRIME factor showing up in two Zodiac terms when converted to Morse/
binary.

The historian Shelby Foote once cited the Confederate Secretary of War, LeRoy
Pope Walker, as predicting that all of the blood shed in the Civil War could be
wiped up with a pocket handkerchief. Foote said there was a PhD. dissertation
waiting for the candidate who could calculate how many handkerchiefs would have
been needed for that task.

I think the same could be said for a PhD. candidate in Mathematics: explain the
chances of the Zodiac killer using those two terms in close association with
each other, PUMPKIN and DRAGON, without being aware that both contained the 4-
digit prime factor 2521.

Especially considering that 2521 isn&#8217;t just ANY 4-digit prime number.

2521 is a 4-digit prime number that can be constructed, in binary, using the
numbers 19 and 89.

110000111111001111000011 == 22552211 (binary math)

1100001111 11001111000011
1199 8899

In other words, PUMPKIN and DRAGON are essentially the same, since they contain
the same 4-digit prime factor (2521).

Covering the skeleton depicted on the front of The Halloween Card (Donna Lass)
with a PUMPKIN is the same as saying she&#8217;s buried under a DRAGON (Dragon
Plaza, the storefront adjacent to 739 Clay Street).

She will be UNCOVERED in 1989, when The Terminus Event takes place on Friday,
August 11 of that year. At that point, The Zodiac Project in its entirety would
be revealed, and the body of Donna Lass dug up.

Except, of course, that it&#8217;s still there, almost 22 years later.

Which he probably DIDN&#8217;T expect.

Incidentally, Donna Lass&#8217;s body is one of the two &#8220;buried
bombs&#8221; the Zodiac refers to cryptically.

BB OO MM BB
22 ++ 1155 ++ 1133 ++ 22 == 3322 ((aallpphhaabbeett nnuummbbeerrss))

BOMB is 32 by alphabet numbers. There are TWO victims, and 32 is 25, thus both
victims are "25" at the time of their deaths (they are buried BOMBs).


Paul Avery

I&#8217;ve mentioned that the Zodiac knew WHO he was killing.

He also knew WHO he was writing to.

When he writes to Melvin Belli, he uses lettering on the envelope that exactly
matches the numbers as they appear on the wall of Belli&#8217;s house.

_h_t_t_p_:_/_/_m_k_-_z_o_d_i_a_c_._c_o_m_/_1_2_2_8_._h_t_m_l

Kudos to Ricardo for noticing that, by the way.

The Zodiac didn't just know Belli's address from looking it up in the phone
book; he'd actually been out to his house, and the house number as written on
the envelope of the letter exactly matches the house number as written on the
side of his house. Or, as Ricardo puts it, they're the same font!

Kudos to Tom Voigt for noticing that the Zodiac copied Count Marco&#8217;s
handwriting in The Count Marco Letter (July 9, 1974).

_h_t_t_p_:_/_/_z_o_d_i_a_c_k_i_l_l_e_r_._2_1_._f_o_r_u_m_e_r_._c_o_m_/
_v_i_e_w_t_o_p_i_c_._p_h_p_?_t_=_5_5_3_8_&_s_t_a_r_t_=_0_&_s_i_d_=_6_6_f_2_7_5_8_5_9_4_3_6_8_4_3_5_5_8_9_e_4_b_f_4_3_8_3_b_c_d_3_f

He didn't just write a menacing Zodiac letter to Count Marco. He somehow
obtained a sample of Count Marco's handwriting, most likely in a personal
letter (though not necessarily to someone Marco actually knew personally), and
then copied aspects of his handwriting (Count Marco's handwriting was somewhat
flowery, and the Zodiac's handwriting in The Count Marco Letter was also
unusually flowery for him) in his own letter to Count Marco.

That might also help to explain Marco Spinelli's sudden decision to stop
writing his column and leave the paper and the city. He hadn't just received a
menacing letter from the Zodiac; he'd received a letter that showed the Zodiac
was a lot closer than he'd ever imagined.

Note, by the way, that the clue on the Belli envelope was subtle; seeing that
clue was nothing short of brilliant. Ricardo, I bow to you, sir! Outstanding
work! But keep in mind that the Belli letter was written right in the middle of
the Zodiac's reign of terror period, so a subtle clue was called for.

In contrast, the mimicking of Count Marco's handwriting was blatant, and it
comes at the very end, in the very last public letter from the Zodiac, three
years after the main Zodiac period and nearly five years after the last
(public) murder (in Tom's case, it's the tracking down of one of Marco
Spinelli's letters and comparing it to The Count Marco Letter that's equally
brilliant).

Remember, I've never said that the Zodiac KNEW his victims, in the sense of
being a friend or an acquaintance or even a peripheral figure in their lives.
I've always said that he knew WHO THEY WERE, in the sense of being aware of
their surface identities (their names, but also other superficial aspects of
their lives), and that, in the course of doing his reconnaissance of possible
victims, he'd learn other useful things about them (for example, that Kathleen
Johns was pregnant and already had a small child, that Darlene Ferrin had
visited The Virgin Islands, that Cheri Bates frequented the RCC library).

Whoever killed Cheri Bates knew her car, and knew her address (since her father
received one of the three looseleaf notes).

Whoever killed Darlene Ferrin shone a flashlight at her before opening fire,
and then called three people named FERRIN an hour-and-a-half after the murder.

Shelly Holmboe's parents received menacing phone calls in the weeks after her
death.

Donna Lass's sister, Mary Pilker, received an odd Christmas card, possibly from
her killer, addressed to her home in South Dakota.

I don't think the Zodiac is at all similar to other serial killers, but one
general characteristic of serial murderers is that they become more blatant and
primitive (not necessarily in method, but in the nature of their attacks) the
further into their careers they get. It's usually this tendency toward their
primitive drives that brings them down; their Mr. Hyde half makes it impossible
for the Dr. Jeckyll half to keep them under wraps, and the mask slides off onto
the floor.

So if we're right about his researching Belli and Spinelli, and about that
research showing up in his letters to them . . . then we'd have to assume he'd
do the same thing with Paul Avery, right?

And if we could show that he DID do that with Avery, it might then suggest,
pretty strongly, that he did it with everybody, including his murder victims.

AAss aa ffoorrmmeerr wwaarr ccoorrrreessppoonnddeenntt iinn VViieettnnaamm aanndd aa lliicceennsseedd pprriivvaattee eeyyee,, AAvveerryy
ccoouulldd hhaannddllee hhiimmsseellff pprreettttyy wweellll.. Robert Graysmith, ZZooddiiaacc, page 161 of the
hardcover edition

When one thinks of a private eye, one thinks of someone surreptitiously peeking
into the private affairs of others, a snooping voyeur trying to catch his
victims with their pants down!

In The Halloween Card, the Zodiac adds TWELVE such peeking eyes looking through
a fence made of wood; in The Lake Tahoe Card, he includes cut-out phrases
saying, "Sought victim 12" and "peek through the pines" (a forest of pine trees
also being a "wood").

How many people knew Paul Avery was a licensed private eye? Maybe he mentioned
it occasionally in his stories, but old-fashioned reporters (such as Avery was,
despite the characterization of him in David Fincher's Zodiac) normally took
great pains to keep themselves out of the stories they covered, so one would
have had to follow Avery pretty closely to know he was a licensed private eye.
And again, in 1970, there was no internet or Robert Graysmith book, so the
information wouldn't have been easy to find.

Note that "private eye" is a slang term for "private investigator" or p-i (note
also, parenthetically, that 'eye' and 'I' are homophones).

But the Zodiac still makes that skeleton do double-duty (his law of symmetry
requiring that he get two meanings out of each symbol he uses). I just said
that a private eye attempts to catch people with their pants down. Note that
the eyes in the card take this to the next level.

The eyes are staring so hard at the victim, their sight turns into x-ray
vision! When you x-ray something, you can see the skeleton underneath.

A reference to X-RAYs might explain why the phrase "sorry no cipher" was
written out twice on the inside of the envelope, in the form of an 'X', and why
the words PARADICE and SLAVES form a cross-word, or X.

_h_t_t_p_:_/_/_w_w_w_._z_o_d_i_a_c_k_i_l_l_e_r_._c_o_m_/_H_a_l_l_o_w_e_e_n_C_a_r_d_E_n_v_e_l_o_p_e_._h_t_m_l

The x-ray reference might also explain why the Zodiac, for the only time I'm
aware of, uses white ink on the inside of the card, as if the effect of the x-
ray has been to turn the printing into a negative of itself. Granted, the white
ink matches what's printed on the face of the card, and it allows the writing
inside to be seen against a dark background. That the face of the card contains
both a skeleton and white ink allows this "x-ray effect" to be disguised,
another example of his misdirection.

And why write to Paul Avery TWICE? Because Paul Avery, in his identity as a
licensed private eye, is doing exactly the same thing the Zodiac is doing:
peeking into the private lives of his targets, and extracting whatever
information will then serve his purpose.

Bookworm on the original archived message board at Zodiackiller.com said he
thought the word &#8220;paradice&#8221; might have something to do with
gambling; if it&#8217;s a reference to Donna Lass, we know she worked at a
casino.


LA Times Letter

The LA Times Letter was mailed, oddly enough, to The Los Angeles Times on March
13, 1971 from Pleasanton, California.

PP LL EE AA SS AA NN TT OO NN
1166 ++ 1122 ++ 55 ++ 11 ++ 1199 ++ 11 ++ 1144 ++ 2200 ++ 1155 ++ 1144 == 111177

Pleasanton is 117 by alphabet numbers. Riverside is 117DEG West.

He mails the letter from PLEASANTON to remind us that he&#8217;s using alphabet
numbers, and to thereby acknowledge his activity in RIVERSIDE.

Which he also does in the text of the letter:

II ddoo hhaavvee ttoo ggiivvee tthheemm
ccrreeddiitt ffoorr ssttuummbblliinngg aaccrroossss
mmyy rriivveerrssiiddee aaccttiivviittyy,, bbuutt
tthheeyy aarree oonnllyy ffiinnddiinngg tthhee
eeaassyy oonneess,, tthheerree aarree aa hheellll
ooff aa lloott mmoorree ddoowwnn tthheerree..

Paul Avery of The San Francisco Chronicle had published a series of articles on
the Zodiac&#8217;s link to Riverside in November 1970. Note that the Zodiac
suggests he&#8217;s committed other murders that the newspapers likewise
haven&#8217;t linked to him as yet (Shelly Holmboe, Robert Salem, Donna Lass).

Note also his wording: &#8220;There are a hell of a lot more down there.&#8221;
In DDaannttee''ss IInnffeerrnnoo, Hell is literally a place &#8220;down there&#8221;, down a
dark hole.

Note finally that the Zodiac ends the letter by complaining about his treatment
from The Chronicle--which had, in fact, temporarily suppressed some of his
letters&#8212;and yet, he never wrote to the LA Times again. His remaining
letters all went to The Chronicle.

So his motive for writing to The Times, besides the Pleasanton clue, was
strictly to drum up more interest in the Riverside link (Riverside being much
closer to Los Angeles than San Francisco). Among other things, this tells us
that the Zodiac&#8217;s audience was never intended to be restricted to the San
Francisco Bay Area.

His work was aimed at the whole world.


Lake Tahoe Card

The Lake Tahoe Card was mailed March 22, 1971 to Paul Avery at The SF
Chronicle.



The Lake Tahoe Card consists entirely of cut-out phrases pasted on top of an ad
for the Forest Pines condo in Lake Tahoe.

Remember what I said about pi-Day?

It's a phrase consisting of perfect squares, applied to the alphabet.

A = 1, D = 4, I = 9, P = 16, Y = 25

This gives us A-D-I-P-Y, an anagram for "pi-Day".

There are any number of dates that can be thought of as representing pi,
including of course March 14 (3-14, the premiere date for The Mikado).

One of these would be September 7, 1945, 9-7-45, because the numerical
components add up to the alphabet numbers for pi:

99 ++ 77 == 1166 ((PP))
44 ++ 55 == 99 ((II))

There are, needless to say, many such dates, but 9-7-45 is significant in this
context because it's Michael O'Hare's mother&#8217;s 38th birthday.

Berta Margoulies was born September 7, 1907; on September 7, 1945, she was 38
years old. On a person's 38th birthday, he is usually 13,880 DAYS old (38 x 365
= 13,870, plus either 9 or 10 leap year days).

1133,,888800

1133 88 88 00(alphabet numbers)
MM HH HH OO

MHHO is Michael Henry O'Hare. Of course, this is a "fudged" result, since the
letter 'O' would be equal to 15, not zero. In any case, Gareth Penn discusses
the importance of 9-7-45 to the Zodiac in his book TTiimmeess 1177.

99--77--4455

The Zodiac wears a costume at Lake Berryessa to celebrate this date. Michael
O&#8217;Hare was born January 22, 1943. On September 27, 1969, he was 9,745
DAYS old.

Donna Lass is abducted on September 6, 1970 because that celebrates 25 years of
pi-Day. If she&#8217;d been abducted on September 7, 1970, that would have made
it 25 years and 1 day.

25 years from September 7, 1945 is completed on September 6, 1970.

That&#8217;s why both Donna Lass and Joan Webster are 25 at their deaths.


Punched Hole

You may have noticed that the Zodiac likes using his hole puncher!

He uses it on The Hole Card (October 5,1970).

He uses it on The Lake Tahoe Card (March 22, 1971).

I mentioned that the Zodiac runs the puncher along the edge of the card to
create the metaphor of 180DEG for a secret identity.

There is also a hole punched in the middle of The Lake Tahoe Card.




If the hole is measured like an x/y coordinate, one will find that the x-value
is

9977 mmiilllliimmeetteerrss ffrroomm tthhee lleefftt mmaarrggiinn,,

and the y-value is

4455 mmiilllliimmeetteerrss uupp ffrroomm tthhee bboottttoomm..

The hole in the card is 9977mmmm//4455mmmm.

I. e., we have the same measurement in millimeters on The Lake Tahoe Card
(9745), that the Zodiac celebrated in days with the Lake Berryessa murder
(9745).

Thus, the punched hole is not just a punched hole.

It is, in effect, a circle, standing for the date 9-7-45.

In a sense, The Zodiac Project has come full circle with the Donna Lass murder.


Donna Lass Review

To reiterate:


11.. TThhee DDoonnnnaa LLaassss mmuurrddeerr iiss pprreeddiicctteedd bbyy tthhee TTiimmeexx lleefftt iinn RRiivveerrssiiddee..

22.. 1122::2222 iiss tthhee cclloocckk ffaaccee ttiimmee ooff tthhee bboorrddeerr aatt LLaakkee TTaahhooee..

33.. DDoonnnnaa LLAASSSS iiss aannootthheerr nnaammee ffoorr aa vviirrggiinnaall ggiirrll..

44.. DDoonnnnaa LLaassss iiss bbuurriieedd aatt 773399 CCllaayy SSttrreeeett iinn SSFF&&##88221177;;ss CChhiinnaattoowwnn ((aaccttuuaallllyy
aaccrroossss tthhee ssttrreeeett))..

55.. 773399 CCllaayy SSttrreeeett iiss aalloonngg tthhee ssoouutthh lleegg ooff tthhee ZZooddiiaacc&&##88221177;;ss rraaddiiaann..

66.. 773399 CCllaayy SSttrreeeett hhoouusseess aa UUSSGGSS bbeenncchhmmaarrkk,, BBMM 5544..

77.. GGaarreetthh PPeennnn&&##88221177;;ss pphhoonnee ## iinn 11998822 ccoonnttaaiinnss tthhee mmuurrddeerr ddaattee&&##88221122;;9900667700..

88.. TThhee zziipp ccooddee ooff SSttaatteelliinnee ((8899444499)) ssppeellllss oouutt DDaayy 222233 ooff YYeeaarr &&##88221166;;8899..

99.. TThhee HHoollee CCaarrdd ccoonnttaaiinnss tthhee ddaattee ooff tthhee bbuurriiaall&&##88221122;;OOccttoobbeerr 55,, 11997700..

1100.. TThhee sskkeelleettoonnss oonn TThhee HHaalllloowweeeenn CCaarrdd rreepprreesseenntt tthhee ttwwoo bbuurriieedd vviiccttiimmss..

1111.. TThhee ttwwoo bbuurriieedd ZZooddiiaacc vviiccttiimmss aarree DDoonnnnaa LLaassss aanndd JJooaann WWeebbsstteerr..

1122.. JJWW&&##88221177;;ss sskkeelleettoonn iiss lloooossee bbeeccaauussee sshhee&&##88221177;;ss ssttiillll aalliivvee wwhheenn
iitt&&##88221177;;ss mmaaiilleedd..

1133.. IItt iiss JJooaann WWeebbsstteerr wwhhoo iiss ddoooommeedd,, NNOOTT PPaauull AAvveerryy..

1144.. TThhee sskkeelleettoonn oonn tthhee ccoovveerr tteellllss uuss tthhee nneexxtt vviiccttiimm iiss 1144 ((yyeeaarrss oolldd))..

1155.. AA PPUUMMPPKKIINN hhaass bbeeeenn ppaasstteedd oovveerr tthhee ccoovveerr sskkeelleettoonn&&##88221177;;ss ccrroottcchh..

1166.. PPUUMMPPKKIINN aanndd DDRRAAGGOONN ccoonnttaaiinn tthhee ssaammee pprriimmee ffaaccttoorr,, 22552211..

1177.. TThhee PPUUMMPPKKIINN mmeeaannss DDoonnnnaa LLaassss iiss bbuurriieedd uunnddeerr ((aatt)) DDRRAAGGOONN PPllaazzaa..

1188.. 22552211 iiss tthhee ssaammee aass 1199--8899 iinn BBiinnaarryy mmaatthh..

1199.. TThhee hhoollee ppuunncchheedd iinn TThhee LLaakkee TTaahhooee CCaarrdd iiss aatt 9977mmmm//4455mmmm..

2200.. TThhee hhoollee ddeennootteess tthhee PPii--DDaayy ddaattee,, 99--77--4455..


I've split this chapter into two parts. Part 1 follows the format of the
earlier book chapters. Part 2 will be interactive, because I want the reader to
follow my path from the benchmark disc at 739 Clay Street . . .



 . . . across the street into Portsmouth Square Park, to the exact location of
Donna Lass's burial position. I've had any number of emails over the past
several months, going back to 2010, with readers asking me to please post the
rest of the book chapters!

Well, there's a reason for the interruption, but I think the subject worthy of
a separate chapter (or sub-chapter, if you will). Something very significant
happened last August, just as this website was getting under way, and I
probably need to discuss it in detail. So I'll be doing that in Part 2, and
I'll have the reader clicking on internet links so he can follow my path
online.

Let's meet at the door of the storefront at 739 Clay Street!



This is actually John Storey's photo from 1990; I don't think the sidewalk on
Clay Street looks like this any more, plus according to Ricardo the benchmark
disc (visible above in the white wall) has since been painted over. But we'll
meet at the door of the virtual storefront!

One word of warning: in _D_a_n_t_e_'_s_ _I_n_f_e_r_n_o, there's a moment near the end of the
poem where the poet looks directly into the face of The Devil. This will happen
to the reader in Part 2. There's nothing I can do to prepare you for that
moment, and I won't even be standing beside you the way Virgil stands beside
Dante, but I thought I'd mention it before it happens.

I don't want a stream of readers trekking like zombies across country, showing
up at my back door and mouthing the word, "How?"

As I said to someone last August, If you knew more about the case, you'd have a
different opinion. Trust me.

Burial Location

I said in the last episode that this section, covering the burial location of
Donna Lass, would be interactive. I will give the reader places to go to on the
Internet. The reader will be told what to look for and where to go look for it.
I do things this way to demonstrate that the burial location isn't some random
spot I stumbled over.

I also said there will come a moment when the reader is in exactly the same
position Dante is in at the end of The Inferno, when he reaches the 9th Circle
of Hell and finds himself staring directly into the face (actually the THREE
faces) of The Devil.

If you're someone who's rejected everything I've said up until now, don't
worry. Your blindness will protect you. You can stare into The Devil's eyes all
day long and you won't see a thing.

If, on the other hand, you've begun to suspect that what I'm saying is actually
the truth . . . well, I can't save you from what you're about to witness, any
more than I could save myself.

And I didn't see it 20 years ago; I saw it for the very first time last August
(2010).

That's why it's taken me so long to get to it here.

There's a scene in Robert A. Heinlein's short story, "By His Bootstraps", in
which the protagonist is using a Time Gate to get a glimpse of a race called
The Timeless Ones that had taken over the Earth. They are long gone by the time
he gains access to the machine, but he wants to see what they looked like. He
moves quickly backward in time on the screen, sees a passing shadow, and then
shifts the controls forward to bring the being into focus.

In the next moment, he realizes that he is a mile or so away from the screen
and has been screaming at the top of his lungs. He walks back to the screen,
eyes averted, and shuts the viewer off. One glimpse of the being has turned his
hair white.

I don't know if what you're about to witness will have that effect on you. It
might. As I said, there are tourists here from Zodiac message boards who are
immune to such things, just as there are American tourists in Europe whose eyes
glaze over at the art to be seen there.

You wonder why they bothered to make the trip.

Those of you capable of recognizing the implications of what you see will be
forever changed.

But first, let's cover the basic logic here and then we'll get down to
specifics.

Radian Review

The Zodiac killer sent a Phillips 66 map with The Mt. Diablo Letter of June 26,
1970.

In a postscript to his letter of July 26, 1970, the Zodiac said, "The Mt.
Diablo code concerns radians &# inches along the radians."

As I said earlier, when one places a radian (57.29DEG) on a map of the Bay Area
. . . with its apex on the above circled point of Mt. Diablo (VABM 3849) . . .
so that the south leg of the angle goes through the intersection of Washington
& Cherry Street (where Paul Stine was murdered) . . . the north leg goes
through the murder scenes at Lake Herman Road and Blue Rock Springs.



If the reader is familiar with the true crime accounts of the Zodiac murders,
he will note that the above diagram includes, on the north leg, two "canonical"
Zodiac venues (Lake Herman Road and Blue Rock Springs), and one such venue on
the south leg (Washington & Cherry).

Gareth Penn, whom I believe to be a Zodiac conspirator, told me more than two
decades ago that there was a central design element to The Zodiac Project.

That central design element was symmetry.

But the Mt. Diablo Radian didn't conform to that design element, at least, not
as it stood.

Since I knew the south leg of the radian was missing a point, and since I knew
that one Bay Area Zodiac victim's body had never been found, it made sense to
me that Donna Lass was buried somewhere along that south leg.

But where?
1990-2010

The Zodiac was using USGS markers as the basis for his designs. Vertical Angle
Bench Mark 3849, the circled apex of The Mt. Diablo Radian, was a spot
significant enough that the Zodiac made sure he left the location on the map
uncovered by his crosshairs.



So the question became: Was there a USGS benchmark on that south leg?

I checked the USGS quadrangle "San Francisco North", and found TWO.

But one of those, BM8 at the Embarcadero, had been destroyed.

The only LIVE USGS benchmark on that south leg was BM54, which was located at
739 Clay Street in Chinatown.



In 1990, when I wrote the original edition of this book, the storefront at 739
Clay Street was called Dragon Plaza. The photograph above, from my book, was
taken by a professional photographer I hired, John Storey of The San Francisco
Examiner.

Here are two more photos by John Storey. The first is the benchmark disc
itself.



The second is the storefront as it looked at street level in 1990.



Here is a Google Earth image of the storefront as it looks today (or recently,
anyway).



It looks as if the disc has been removed, but Ricardo from Project MK-Zodiac
tells me it's only been painted over.



I assumed, in 1990, that Donna Lass would logically be buried in the closest
open ground to the BM54 disc. So I had John Storey walk up to the benchmark
disc of BM54 and photograph it. He was then to move backward in the direction
of the nearest open ground and photograph THAT. When I saw the picture of
DRAGON PLAZA above, besides realizing that it was what was referenced by the
Zodiac's Little Dragon Card of April 28, 1970, I also realized that the open
ground in the foreground was where Donna Lass was buried.

Keep in mind that in 1990, getting to Donna Lass's body meant physically
digging it up. So going to the police with my project didn't hold much promise.
I DID go to the police anyway; the first edition of my book was called the
POLICE EDITION because that's who received books first in August 1990. I
offered to pay to have the lawn where the women are standing in the picture dug
up, but none of the police agencies took me up on the offer.

By 2000, I'd been made aware of GPR machines. Ground Penetrating Radar allows a
surface machine to locate objects underground. The machine itself looks like a
lawn mower except that it's a lot quieter, and it can be rolled over ground
while the operator looks at a screen up where his hands are. I contacted Ken
Blom of Norcal Geophysics and offered him the job. Blom was willing to do it,
but only if SFPD agreed to allow it.

I then got Detective Tom Conner of South Lake Tahoe Police Department, who had
an active Donna Lass investigation, to contact SFPD directly. As you might have
guessed already, SFPD's Kelly Carroll vetoed the idea, even though it didn't
involve breaking any ground. Carroll said he didn't want the media "circus"
associated with such a stunt to distract from his police work. Exactly what
work on the case I was distracting him from, I haven't figured out.

Two years later, ABC News did a Primetime Live show on the DNA investigation
involving Zodiac letters. Although the show itself presented the angle as a
major breakthrough in the case, the effort on the part of SFPD can best be
described as half-hearted. Almost immediately after the show aired, SFPD put
their Zodiac investigation on permanent hold.

I then contacted the San Francisco Medical Examiner and suggested his lab at
the very least compare the DNA from the Zodiac envelopes with the full profile
that was left on Cheri Bates's bloody palm. All this got me was a nasty
telephone answering machine message from Kelly Carroll, telling me to route any
further suggestions through his own office. This amounted to telling me not to
MAKE any further suggestions, so I didn't bother getting back to him.

In July 2010, I was just getting ready to publish this website when I happened
to be in a chat room with Ricardo from MK-Zodiac. Ricardo told me he worked
about a block from the 700 block of Clay Street. When I mentioned BM54 and
Dragon Plaza, he said that the storefront, which was now called DRAGON SEED,
was across the street from "the park".

I said, "WHAT park?"

Dragon Seed was directly across the street from Portsmouth Square Park, a
Chinatown landmark that consisted of an entire city block, with playgrounds,
benches, and a garage.

I walked around like a zombie from a George Romero movie for days, trying to
make sense of this new information. I SHOULD have realized that a park was
across the street in 1990, because, as I found out by looking at John Storey's
contact sheets, he'd included shots of the park on them, he just hadn't sent me
any individual prints of them. And I can't blame John for that oversight, since
I'd been so focused on BM54 and what was closest to it. At the time, I actually
assumed that the shot of the grass, the tree, the park bench, and the two women
talking was a traffic island in the middle of the street. But it didn't matter;
I was interested in the closest open ground to the BM54 disc.

The first thing that occurred to me was that the presence of the park actually
made sense. The Zodiac had used the term PARK numerous times in his
correspondence, as if hinting at its significance. More significantly, using a
USGS benchmark disc directly across the street from a park as a marker gave him
a lot more options for a burial site.

His implication was clear: Donna Lass was buried somewhere in Portsmouth Square
Park.

But where? Tom Voigt had correctly podcast that the park was almost entirely
covered in concrete, and Ed Neil had, also correctly, pointed out the several
renovations the park had undergone since October 1970 (assuming the mailing of
The Hole Card fixed the time of the actual burial). Surely any renovation would
turn up a buried body?

Nope, that's wrong, as it turns out.

There's one area in the park that contains open ground that hasn't, as far as
I've been able to tell, been significantly renovated since 1960.

But before I show it to you, let's reframe the question.

If Donna Lass is buried SOMEWHERE in Portsmouth Square Park, where SPECIFICALLY
is that spot?

To answer that question, I took a look at Portsmouth Square Park, but there's
something I need to tell the reader first so that he knows what I knew before I
took that look.



When I talked about The Halloween Card, I said there were TWO skeletons
contained in the card. One was on the front of the card; it was actually PART
OF THE CARD. That's because the person that skeleton represented, Donna Lass,
was already dead and buried by the time the card was sent. That's the reason
the skeleton on the front of the card can't move.



The other skeleton, inside the card, isn't actually attached to the card. It
can still move. This is because, when the card was mailed on October 28, 1970,
Joan Webster was still alive. It would be 11 years and one month before Joan
Webster was abducted and murdered on November 28, 1981, after last being seen
in Logan Airport in Boston.

Donna Lass and Joan Webster were mirror-image victims. As The Hole Card
suggests, they were the last two cards dealt by the Zodiac, both face DOWN. One
was on the East Coast, one was on the West Coast. Each was 25 years old at the
time of her abduction and murder.

And there is at least one other very striking similarity between the two young
women.

EASTER TERMINUS

The reader will recall that I said all Zodiac victims have some significant
relationship to the word EASTER, or to Easter as a concept.

The names of DAVID FARADAY, DARLENE FERRIN, and SHELLY HOLMBOE all contain the
word EASTER in Morse code. BETTY LOU JENSEN is a collateral victim, as Michael
Mageau would have been if he'd died at Blue Rock Springs; the actual target in
both crimes was the driver of the car. The names of CHERI BATES and ROBERT
SALEM contain EASTER as an anagram. CECELIA SHEPARD belonged to a sect (the 7th
Day Adventists) that didn't celebrate Easter (since it celebrated the sabbath
on Saturday), a sect founded by a man named JOSEPH BATES (the name of CHERI's
father, and a name contained within her own name, Cheri JOSEPHine BATES). PAUL
STINE's cab left the stand in front of the St. Francis Hotel to be flagged down
by the Zodiac; St. Francis, who gave his name to both the city Stine lived in
and the school he attended (San Francisco State), founded his order on Good
Friday.

The other concept the Zodiac is preoccupied with is The Terminus. The last day
of the Roman year, February 23rd (2-23), is the day stones consecrated by an
animal sacrifice were buried to mark off property in the Roman state. The
stones were, at least symbolically, the equivalent of modern USGS benchmarks.
I've given any number of examples of 23/23, 2x23, and 2-23 in the Zodiac lore.
I've referred to the Zodiac's ultimate target date, Friday, August 11, 1989, as
The Terminus Event.

Those two words, EASTER and TERMINUS, are of prime importance to the Zodiac.

Thus, we would expect the two buried victims, DONNA LASS and JOAN WEBSTER, to
both be associated with those words: EASTER, because all Zodiac victims have
some relationship to it, and TERMINUS, because the two buried victims were
intended to be dug up ONLY after The Terminus Event.

Remember what the Zodiac says in The Mt. Diablo Letter?

YYoouu hhaavvee uunnttiillll nneexxtt ffaallll ttoo ddiigg iitt uupp..

DONNA LASS and JOAN WEBSTER are the buried bombs he's talking about.

Like the character in "By His Bootstraps", we're going to move backward in
time. We're going to start with the victim who was killed eleven years in the
future, and then look back.

Where was Joan Webster last seen alive?

At the baggage claim area of the Eastern Airlines Terminal.

EEAASSTTEERRnn AAiirrlliinneess TTEERRMMIINNAALL

EEAASSTTEERR TTEERRMMIINNAALL

Am I suggesting that the Zodiac somehow knew, when he began following Cheri
Bates's car up that alley a block from The RCC Library that evening in 1966,
that he would abduct and kill Joan Webster at Logan Airport's Eastern Airlines
Terminal that night in 1981?

No.

In fact, the Zodiac presumably could NOT have planned anything relating to
Logan Airport's Eastern Airlines Terminal in 1966, because it wasn't even
constructed until 1969. Ironically, The EAT was designed by the same man,
Minoru Yamasaki, who designed The World Trade Center.



Yamasaki's design for the WTC was completed in 1965, but the complex itself
wasn't finished until 1972. The lead time for the Eastern Airlines Terminal
would not have been seven years, but the initial planning for it would have
preceded its construction by several years. One can be sure that Harvard's
Department of Architecture, where Michael O'Hare was a graduate student, would
have been aware of the project by 1966 or 1967.

I'm suggesting that the Zodiac created a structure into which he plugged
appropriate victims as they presented themselves to him. I'm suggesting that
structure was sufficiently flexible to allow him to give the appearance of
selecting both individual victims and specific venues years ahead of time, when
he was actually picking victims whose names were appropriate, and choosing to
move on them when they were in areas that were appropriate (or abducting them
and then putting them in those areas while making it look as if they went there
under their own power).

To put this another way, I don't know HOW, specifically, they pulled off the
abduction and murder of Joan Webster, though Michael O'Hare was a professor at
Harvard with degrees in Architecture, and Joan Webster was an architectural
grad student. It's not hard to imagine why she would have accepted his offer of
a ride back to campus that night, and we know for a fact that Michael O'Hare
was in Logan Airport that evening.

Geophysics

Where was Joan Webster last seen alive?

At the baggage claim area of the Eastern Airlines Terminal.

EEAASSTTEERRnn AAiirrlliinneess TTEERRMMIINNAALL

EEAASSTTEERR TTEERRMMIINNUUSS

I didn&#8217;t realize it at the time, but the Zodiac left a clue to the
location of Donna Lass&#8217;s body after the fact, when he abducted and
murdered Joan Webster.

Donna Lass and Joan Webster were mirror-images.

That meant something about their deaths had to be the same, just as the two
drivers in Vallejo both had the initials DF. Just as the Lake Berryessa
victims, who were 7th Day Adventists (a sect founded by a man named Joseph
Bates), were linked to the victim in Riverside (Cheri JOSEPHine BATES).

I had looked at Portsmouth Square Park and seen those two words on a marker
there, but their connection to Joan Webster didn&#8217;t hit me right away. I
was getting off a bus in Oakland, the university section of Pittsburgh where I
worked in August 2010, when I suddenly remembered where Joan Webster was last
seen alive.

I immediately rehired my photographer from 1990, John Storey of The San
Francisco Examiner, and had the marker in Portsmouth Square Park photographed
in context. I did what research I could about previous park renovations; San
Francisco&#8217;s City Planning Office wasn&#8217;t exactly forthcoming.

In the weeks and months that followed, I contacted literally dozens of
geophysical companies in The San Francisco Bay Area. Several expressed
willingness, even enthusiasm, about my GPR project, until I told them exactly
what I was looking for. At that point, they all stopped answering my emails.

Right around the time Donna Lass was buried, which was October 1970, a Sunoco
gas station on the corner of Murray and Bartlett Streets in the Squirrel Hill
section of Pittsburgh was being turned into an office building. Since winter
was approaching, the contractors decided to hire construction workers who would
ordinarily be taking off because of the cold weather. They figured they could
save money by offering jobs during a down time of the year. What they
didn&#8217;t figure was that, when they dug down to sub-basement level, they
would uncover two railroad car-sized gas tanks. They had expected just the
plastic tanks under the current pumps. Now, they were screwed. They
couldn&#8217;t risk using blow torches on the metal tanks in February; even a
little puff of gasoline vapor would have been enough to erase that block from
city street maps.

So they stopped work and waited for the spring thaw.

One of the things this tells us, if you&#8217;re paying attention, is that GPR
technology wasn&#8217;t available back in 1970. If it had been, the contractors
would certainly have used it before they broke ground.

I&#8217;m in the same situation as those contractors. I wrote to the mayor of
San Francisco after the geophysical companies I tried to hire didn&#8217;t
respond. I even contacted some VIPs in Chinatown. At the moment, the ground
around me is frozen, but maybe I can thaw it by providing a little bit of
daylight?

Portsmouth Square Park

Let's find Donna Lass.

It's all yours, reader:

_P_O_R_T_S_M_O_U_T_H_ _S_Q_U_A_R_E_ _P_A_R_K

You need to think about this, now that you've seen it with your own eyes.

I've pointed out the importance of those two words: EASTER and TERMINUS.

I've pointed out that there is only one USGS bench mark on the south leg of the
Mt. Diablo Radian, BM54 located at 739 Clay Street.



And THREE people--Ricardo, Tom Voigt, and Ed Neil--have pointed out my colossal
ignorance in NOT knowing that Portsmouth Square Park was across the street from
that storefront.

So . . . what are the chances that my mistake actually leads us to the
solution?

Think about that, reader.

How likely is it that a place I didn't even know existed in July 2010 contains
a marker with those two words on it (EASTER and TERMINUS)?

Both Donna Lass and Joan Webster would be listed as possible Zodiac victims in
various books and on various websites, even if no one had ever heard of Ray
Grant.

We know Joan Webster was last seen alive in the baggage claim area of Logan
Airport's Terminal A, The Eastern Airlines Terminal.

I didn't take a dart and throw it at a map of San Francisco. I started with The
Mt. Diablo Radian, which is apexed on a USGS bench mark (VABM 3849), and found
the only OTHER bench mark on the south leg of that angle (739 Clay Street).
Across the street from the BM54 bench mark disc is Portsmouth Square Park,
which contains a marker with those two words on it.



I hired John Storey again last year, to walk into Portsmouth Square Park and
take more pictures for me. This time, instead of a USGS Benchmark, I asked him
to photograph that marker. As I did in 1990, I asked John to start at the
marker and gradually move backward. I will walk the reader through the
sequence. These photos were taken on Wednesday, August 18, 2010.

The first is the marker itself:



The marker set in place, with the railing above the Portsmouth Square Garage
doors below:



The marker showing traffic on Kearny Street below:



The marker, the park, Kearny Street, and the foliage on the hillside to the
right and below:



Several steps back, the TransAmerica Pyramid is visible above the background
buildings:


Note both The Garden Restaurant across Kearny Street and the car going into the
Portsmouth Square Garage doors below:



Now here is the same spot, looking up from the garage doors on Kearny Street
below:



Garden Restaurant SF

I promised the reader the chance to find the burial spot himself, and I'm about
to make good on that promise.

1. You want to start by Googling THE GARDEN RESTAURANT SAN FRANCISCO.

2. There should be a link that says MAPS.GOOGLE under THE GARDEN RESTAURANT.

3. Click on that link and then click on the Street View.

4. The sign with the words THE GARDEN RESTAURANT was dark red; now it's yellow.

5. Now go to the navigation dial in the upper left.

6. Move the 'N' on the dial from a quarter TO the hour to a quarter AFTER.

7. You should be looking at the Portsmouth Square Garage doors.

8. See the hillside to the left?

The Portsmouth Square Garage was built in 1960. The city just celebrated its
50th anniversary last year. I'm sure the machines which spit out tickets have
changed, and maybe the signs and the painted lines have changed, but the garage
doors haven't. And if the garage doors haven't changed, it's reasonable to
assume that hillside has gone essentially undisturbed.

A friend of mine is a graduate student in anthropology. She's done some
digging. She says what the Zodiac probably did was freeze the body and then
compress it until it was suitcase-sized, and finally bury it about four feet
down. That depth would be enough to sidestep any superficial landscaping, and
might even put the body beyond the range of GPR.

The area to the left of the garage doors is bordered by concrete. I'm guessing
it's 200 or 300 square feet. I'd start up near the marker and work my way down.





_1_9_7_4

Content copyright
. Raymond Grant. All rights reserved.

_[_W_e_b_ _H_o_s_t_i_n_g_]
