














The Zodiac Murders--Solved!
my other website: _Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _K_i_l_l_e_r_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e
you tube videos:_Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _k_i_l_l_e_r_ _s_o_l_v_e_d
Your Subtitle text
    * _H_o_m_e_ _P_a_g_e
    * _I_n_t_r_o_ _S_e_c_t_i_o_n
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e
    * _V_a_l_l_e_j_o
    * _C_r_y_p_t_o_g_r_a_m
    * _L_a_k_e_ _B_e_r_r_y_e_s_s_a
    * _P_r_e_s_i_d_i_o_ _H_e_i_g_h_t_s
    * _S_h_e_l_l_y_ _H_o_l_m_b_o_e
    * _3_4_0
    * _J_o_h_n_s_ _&_ _S_a_l_e_m
    * _1_9_7_0_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _D_o_n_n_a_ _L_a_s_s
    * _1_9_7_4
    * _1_9_8_0_/_1_9_8_1
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _A_r_t_i_c_l_e_s
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_1
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_2
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_4
    * _W_h_a_t_'_s_ _N_e_w
************ JJoohhnnss && SSaalleemm ************

Kathleen Johns

It stands to reason that if you&#8217;re a killer who picks certain victims by
name, and by their appropriateness within your overall scheme, then most people
will have to be eliminated as candidates for murder.

If you&#8217;ve constructed a puzzle that juggles identity, topographic
locations, ways of measuring time and space, cultural allusions, and any number
of other themes, then, most of the time, you&#8217;re going to pass on
potential victims who are unsuitable because their names are wrong, or their
identities don&#8217;t fit, or the location doesn&#8217;t mesh with the
pattern, or the timing&#8217;s wrong.

Or all of the above.

And since it&#8217;s a puzzle, you would have to, at some point, suggest to the
public what those eligibility boundaries are.

If you wanted to demonstrate all your various parameters, you would probably
pick a victim who was inappropriate IN EVERY POSSIBLE WAY.

And then, to top everything off, you would behave in such a way as to almost
not be recognizable yourself, right?

Where you&#8217;d murdered your other victims quickly . . . this time
you&#8217;d hesitate.

Where you'd barely been visible long enough to make an impression, or worn a
hood, this time you'd be sitting next to your victim for hours.

Where you'd been quiet or silent, this time you'd be motor-mouthed.

The downside of doing this would be that you&#8217;d have a Zodiac event and no
murder!

The upside of doing it would be that you would have a living witness following
the event, and therefore you could show that witness aspects of your previous
crimes that might otherwise have escaped the attention of police and public.

For example, that you&#8217;d abducted some previous victims before killing
them.

That the Kathleen Johns kidnapping was longer in time than all the other Zodiac
killer events put together should suggest how tight his focus was elsewhere.



Kathleen Johns Facts

Late Sunday evening, March 22, 1970, a 7-months-pregnant woman named Kathleen
Johns was driving her car near Modesto, California when a passing motorist
signaled that there was something the matter with her car. She pulled over, and
the man stopped and said her left rear wheel was loose. He offered to tighten
her lugs. After he did, she started driving again and the tire he had worked on
rolled off the car and spun into weeds at the side of the road. Saying the
trouble was worse than he thought, the man offered to give her a ride to the
nearest service station. Kathleen got into the car with her 10-month-old infant
child. When they got to the next service station. the man merely drove by. She
asked if he always went around helping people like this.

The man said, &#8220; When I&#8217;m through with them they don&#8217;t need
any help.&#8221; Then the man began saying, &#8220; You know I&#8217;m going to
kill you. You know you&#8217;re going to die.&#8221; They rode around like that
for about 3 hours, and Kathleen finally got the nerve to jump out of the car
when the man threatened to throw her baby out the window. Some time later,
Kathleen was taken to a local sheriff&#8217;s office and happened to see the
Zodiac killer WANTED poster on the wall.

&#8220; That&#8217;s HIM,&#8221; she told the officer. &#8220; That&#8217;s the
man who kidnapped me!&#8221;

Police officers looking for Kathleen&#8217;s car found that her abductor had
driven back to it, put the wheel back on, driven the car to the intersection of
Highway 132 and Bird Road, and then set fire to it, gutting the car.

In the movie ZZooddiiaacc, David Fincher has Paul Avery, played by Robert Downey,
Jr., doubt that the Zodiac killer committed the kidnapping, suggesting instead
that he merely took credit for it afterward. This, if you think about it, is
absurd.

You have the amazing coincidence of Kathleen Johns seeing the WANTED poster and
immediately identifying the Zodiac killer as her abductor, and then the Zodiac
killer himself claiming her as a victim a few months later, for a crime the
bizarre nature of which has &#8216;Zodiac&#8217; written all over it. I say
there&#8217;s no doubt the Zodiac killer kidnapped Kathleen Johns.

So how did she survive in one piece, and with her baby unmolested, when
everyone else he encountered either ended up dead or scarred for life?


Public Demonstration

I&#8217;ve said that the Zodiac victims were killed because certain aspects of
their identities&#8212;primarily their names, but also their ability to be
designated as virgins (at least nominally), their locations on the map, and
even their posittions in time itself&#8212;were appropriate within the themes
of The Zodiac Project. If certain victims were appropriate, it stands to reason
that certain other potential victims would have been inappropriate. The
Kathleen Johns episode was a public demonstration of conditions under which he
COULDN&#8217;T kill.



March 22

Note the date that the kidnapping was initiated: Sunday, March 22nd.

March 22nd is 3-22.

One of the overall themes of The Zodiac Project is 2/23, or 2-23.

But 322 is the reverse, or opposite of 223.

Thus, the Zodiac killer abducts a potential victim on "322", and he CAN&#8217;T
kill her.

He drives Kathleen Johns around for three hours to demonstrate this.



Non-Virgin

If you were trying to show that you only kill virgins, or people who could
somehow be associated with a word that means &#8216;virgin&#8217;, how would
you make a public demonstration of that?

What sort of person would you choose NOT to kill?

Might you pick a woman who was 7 months pregnant?

And carrying with her a 10-month-old child?

In other words, someone who not only WASN&#8217;T a virgin, but was DOUBLY Not
A Virgin (thus obeying the law of symmetry)?



Fire Bird

Finally, note what the Zodiac killer does to her car. He drives all the way
back to it, puts the wheel back on, drives it to another location, and then
sets fire to it!

This takes place at the intersection of Highway 132 and Bird Road.

Let&#8217;s look at the Morse/binary numbers for FIRE.

FF II RR EE
00001100 0000 001100 00 == 113322 (Morse/binary math)

The word FIRE converts to the number 132. So he parks Kathleen Johns&#8217;s
car at Highway 132 and Bird Road to create the phrase FIRE BIRD. To underscore
this, he sets fire to the car.

Another blazing example of symmetry!



Phoenix

As I mention in Chapter H, he sets fire to a car to anticipate his own Death &
Rebirth as the Zodiac killer on August 11, 1989. With his death will come
immortality, and the realization by the world that he selected his victims
ahead of time.

The Egyptian Phoenix&#8212;The Fire Bird&#8212;rose from its own ashes.

It was a symbol based upon sunrise, which follows sunset and the night.

The torching of the Johns vehicle at Highway 132 and Bird Road was in
anticipation of the events of August 11, 1989. It was a physical manifestation
of his own Death and Rebirth.



Kidnapping

The Johns abduction may also be a demonstration of something else.

I&#8217;ve already said that I don&#8217;t believe Cheri Bates ever went into
The RCC Library the night she was murdered. I believe it was important for the
Zodiac killer to have complete control of the situation, which meant he
probably abducted her at gunpoint the moment she got out of her car. This
allowed him to put her body where he needed it to be, and to go into the
library & take out the books on The Electoral College.

I also believe the two teenagers at Lake Herman Road may have been abducted
prior to their trip out to the turn-off. They told friends they were going to
an event at the high school, but somehow they ended up out there in the pitch
darkness . . . on what was supposedly their first date, having not gone
anywhere else first except the drive-in diner.

It is easier to abduct people and place them on the landscape than a lot of
people might believe, particularly when you have the California motor vehicles
and driver's license data bases at your disposal, and particularly when no one
lives to tell about it.

I can think of three immediate objections to this line of thinking:

a, what if something went wrong during the kidnapping and one of the victims
got away?;

b, if he kidnapped Faraday and Jensen, and could place them EXACTLY, why
wouldn't their car be closer to the correct angle value of the north leg of the
radian (it's off by 1-2DEG); and

c, why not also kidnap Darlene Ferrin?

And my responses to these objections are:

a, If one of the victims gets away during the kidnapping, the crime resembles
the Johns kidnapping except with a murder at the end (assuming he kills the
remaining victim), and then maybe he doesn't do the Johns kidnapping. It's
interesting that he does the Johns kidnapping after all the public murder
events, which to me suggests that nothing went wrong earlier.

b, Again, I don't think he ever felt he needed the radian to be EXACTLY
57.29DEG.&nbsp; I think he assumed most (bright) people would get the point. In
any case, as I say elsewhere, someone jumping up and down and screaming IT'S
NOT A RADIAN! because it's off by a degree or two completely misses the point,
and I don't mean the point of the radian mention. The reason I talk about the
killer's INTENT in my intro section is that his INTENT is really what matters,
and that's true of any attempted profiling of a conventional serial killer
(though I'm no longer sure there's any such thing).

I'm not a huge fan of FBI profiling, but the insight that most serial killers
commit their first murder in their own neighborhoods, where they feel more
comfortable, should not be susceptible to some "skeptic" pointing out that a
particular first murder was across some invisible boundary line on a map and
thus, not in his neighborhood after all! That's not argument; it's heckling,
when the heckler has nothing positive to contribute.

c, My own take on Darlene Ferrin is that her movements were much more
predictable than most people's, that she had a small handful of places where
she liked to hang out (as David Fincher's movie makes clear), and that, after
initially following her around, the Zodiac conspirators came to the conclusion
that she was a very good bet to end up in that clearing sometime on the night
of July 4th (though they were almost wrong about that). Thus, there was no need
to further complicate matters by kidnapping her.

In any case, another reason to abduct Kathleen Johns and then make sure she
gets away would be to show how easily a person&#8212;someone you chose in
advance--can be kidnapped.


Threat Wording

Note, finally, how the Zodiac killer words his threats to Kathleen. He
doesn&#8217;t say, &#8220;I&#8217;m going to kill you. You&#8217;re going to
die.&#8221; He says, &#8220; YOU KNOW I&#8217;m going to kill you. YOU KNOW
you&#8217;re going to die.&#8221; He is deliberately setting up a demonstration
of something that isn&#8217;t going to happen, because she&#8217;s an
inappropriate victim. So his wording reflects that, even though it appears that
he intends to do her harm, and even though his words APPEAR to threaten her.



Jumping Out

Oh, I almost forgot!

So why did the Zodiac drive her around for three hours, if he didn&#8217;t
intend to kill her?

Well, that&#8217;s the funny part!

The Zodiac killer kept coming up to stop signs out on the rural roads and
slowing down and doing a Hollywood stop at each one, and kept repeating over
and over again, &#8220; You know I&#8217;m going to kill you. You know
you&#8217;re going to die . . .&#8221;

It&#8217;s almost as if he were waiting for her to jump out!

But she never did!

So finally he drove the wrong way up a freeway exit and came to a stop and left
the car, at which point she grabbed her baby and ran off into the weeds.

My guess is Michael O&#8217;Hare heaved a big sigh of relief and said, &#8220;
Finally!&#8221;

In this particular episode, the Zodiac killer was stuck with an almost
insoluble problem.

He had to make it look like he really intended to kill her while somehow
letting her get away.

As I&#8217;ve pointed out, he generally struck very quickly, so the very fact
that he could drive Kathleen around for three hours tells you he never intended
for her to be a victim.

Still, this is one of at least two instances during The Zodiac
Project&#8212;the other being the Channel 7 show, and the unfortunate phone
intrusion by the mental patient&#8212;where things don&#8217;t go according to
the Zodiac killer&#8217;s script.

If you like your humor black, those moments are the comedy relief.


Kathleen Johns Review


11.. TThhee kkiiddnnaappppiinngg iiss aa ddeemmoonnssttrraattiioonn ooff wwhhaatt tthhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr CCAANN&&##88221177;;TT ddoo..

22.. MMaarrcchh 2222nndd iiss 33--2222,, tthhee ooppppoossiittee ooff tthhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr&&##88221177;;ss 22--2233..

33.. KKaatthhlleeeenn JJoohhnnss wwaass pprreeggnnaanntt aanndd hhaadd aa 1100--mmoonntthh oolldd iinnffaanntt..

44.. SShhee wwaass ddeemmoonnssttrraabbllyy aanndd ddoouubbllyy NNOOTT aa vviirrggiinn..

55.. HHee ttoorrcchheess tthhee ccaarr aatt HHiigghhwwaayy 113322 aanndd BBiirrdd rrooaadd&&##88221122;;FFIIRREE--BBIIRRDD..

66.. TThhee EEggyyppttiiaann FFiirree--BBiirrdd iiss tthhee PPhhooeenniixx..

77.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr wwiillll ddiiee aanndd bbee rreebboorrnn,, lliikkee tthhee PPhhooeenniixx,, iinn iinnffaammyy..

88.. TThhee JJoohhnnss kkiiddnnaappppiinngg mmaayy aallssoo ddeemmoonnssttrraattee pprreevviioouuss aabbdduuccttiioonnss..

99.. TThhee aabbdduuccttiioonn llaasstteedd tthhrreeee hhoouurrss bbeeccaauussee sshhee wwoouullddnn&&##88221177;;tt jjuummpp oouutt!!



Robert Salem

Any murder investigator, especially one looking into a serial murder case
that&#8217;s decades old (and therefore, cold), MUST make assumptions. Unless
the murder scene gives up irrefutable forensic evidence that one can
immediately take into court, an investigator is forced to choose among possible
paths. These avenues open up like those before Armond Pelissetti on the night
of Paul Stine&#8217;s murder, when he started walking down Cherry Street, wary
of the darkness, and had to make a decision at each intersection as to which
way to go.

I&#8217;ve always said that Robert Salem is a Zodiac victim. Other writers on
the case, including Robert Graysmith, have considered other victims who MIGHT
have been killed by the Zodiac, mainly because he&#8217;d hinted that there
WERE such &#8220;secret&#8221; victims that he didn&#8217;t boast about. When I
wrote the first edition of this book in 1990, Shelly Holmboe and Robert Salem
seemed the most likely &#8220;secret&#8221; victims, both in the details of
their deaths and in their places in the overall scheme, and nothing I&#8217;ve
learned in the last twenty years has changed that opinion.

I suspect that, though he was only the eighth individual victim chronologically
out of ten, Robert Salem was actually the last victim chosen. In fact, I think
it&#8217;s entirely possible that Salem would be alive today if Michael Mageau
hadn&#8217;t survived the attack at Blue Rock Springs.



Robert Salem Facts

Robert Salem, 40, was a well-known lamp designer who lived and worked in a
residence/studio in the 700 block of Stevenson Street, an alley behind The San
Franciscan Hotel at 1231 Mission Street. On April 19, 1970, police responded to
a complaint from people living in the rooms on the back side of the hotel, of a
horrible smell coming from the alley. When they investigated, they found
Salem&#8217;s nude body sprawled inside his apartment in the midst of a bloody
scene reminiscent of a slaughterhouse.

His killer or killers had turned the thermostat up to 90DEG.

Salem was stabbed multiple times and nearly decapitated.

His left ear had been cut off.

On the wall, printed in the victim&#8217;s blood, were the words

SSAATTAANN SSAAVVEESS..

An Egyptian ankh was drawn near the name

ZZOODDIIAACC..

The same symbol was drawn in blood on the victim&#8217;s stomach, though Robert
Graysmith calls it a &#8220;dripping red symbol of a crucified man&#8221;.

The killer apparently used the shower after the murder.

Police almost immediately decided the murder was not the work of the real
Zodiac killer, but a copycat effort. How they came to this conclusion is
anyone&#8217;s guess.



Stanley Dean Baker

No one has ever been convicted of the Robert Salem murder.

A man named Stanley Dean Baker supposedly confessed to the murder to California
Highway Patrol detectives, adding that he carried away Salem&#8217;s ear
because he was a cannibal.

Any number of suspects in other cases have been convicted on nothing more
substantial than their own confessions, but Baker was never even charged in the
Salem case.

A reporter for USA Today wearily explained to me, some 20 years ago, that
police also had Baker&#8217;s fingerprints in blood at the scene.

Frankly, I find this difficult to believe. Fingerprints in blood tend to be
very convincing to most juries, and there&#8217;s no statute of limitations on
murder.

Baker was charged and convicted of the 1970 murder of James Schlosser, and
ultimately paroled in 1986 (no, I don&#8217;t understand why, either). He was
even allowed to take up a new identity (and, one hopes, a new diet) in Wyoming.

Why wouldn&#8217;t some ambitious young prosecutor go after Baker with the
signed confession and the bloody fingerprints? They could even have done that
while he was still in jail in Montana. It happens all the time. The case would
figure to be fairly straightforward . . . unless, of course, police DON&#8217;T
have any physical evidence against him.

And perhaps don&#8217;t even have a confession.

When James Schlosser&#8217;s body was found, it was missing its head, heart,
several fingers . . . and all four of his limbs had been hacked off. The heart
had supposedly been eaten raw and whole by Stanley Dean Baker.

In contrast, there was no evidence of cannibalism at the Robert Salem crime
scene, except perhaps for the missing ear, which may or may not have been eaten
since there&#8217;s no sign of it. If he did kill Robert Salem, Stanley Dean
Baker apparently didn&#8217;t find his body very appetizing. Why not? If he was
such a compulsive cannibal, why wasn&#8217;t he hungry that time?

Another odd thing: James Schlosser was shot twice in the head before he was
cannibalized. The cutting up of his body was post-mortem.

Robert Salem wasn&#8217;t shot, and his body wasn&#8217;t cut up.



Gary Hinman Murder

The Robert Salem murder bears a much more striking resemblance to murders
committed by the Manson family in 1969.

In fact, in many respects, it is identical to the murder of Gary Alan Hinman,
which was discovered on July 31, 1969, coincidentally the same day the Zodiac
mailed out The Cryptogram letters. Hinman&#8217;s face had been deeply slashed
on the left side, his left ear cut off, and he had two stab wounds to the
chest.

Hinman's house had been ransacked and the words "Political Piggie" were written
on the wall in his blood, next to a panther paw, also in blood. The panther paw
was meant to leave the impresson that the Black Panthers killed him.

IInn bbootthh mmuurrddeerrss,, tthhee vviiccttiimm&&##88221177;;ss lleefftt eeaarr wwaass ccuutt ooffff..

IInn bbootthh mmuurrddeerrss,, tthhee kkiilllleerr oorr kkiilllleerrss uusseedd tthhee sshhoowweerr aafftteerrwwaarrdd..

IInn bbootthh mmuurrddeerrss,, wwoorrddss wweerree wwrriitttteenn oonn tthhee wwaallll iinn bblloooodd..

IInn bbootthh mmuurrddeerrss,, aa ssyymmbbooll wwaass aallssoo ddrraawwnn oonn tthhee wwaallll..

It seems clear that the Salem murderer(s), at the very least, borrowed ideas
from the Hinman murderers. SFPD has called the Salem murder a
&#8220;copycat&#8221; crime, meaning the killer was trying to make the homicide
look like the work of the Zodiac killer. I think it is much more accurate to
say the killer was copying the Hinman murder, while affixing the Zodiac&#8217;s
name to it.

So the question then becomes, was Stanley Dean Baker bright enough and
organized enough (for the FBI, this is always the key question when dealing
with serial killers) to have consciously copied the Hinman murder?

Maybe he was. I doubt it.

Shortly after he killed James Schlosser, Stanley Dean Baker was apprehended on
suspicion of murder because he&#8217;d been driving Schlosser&#8217;s car.

He&#8217;d been driving Schlosser&#8217;s car on the wrong side of the road.

While speeding.
.
Plus he was found to have a human index finger in his pocket.

None of which sounds either bright or particularly organized.



Bottomless Pit

One additional idea linking the Zodiac and Manson murders must have been
particularly striking to the Zodiac conspirators.

Charles Manson intended his murders, he said, to trigger a race war between
blacks and whites, as supposedly suggested by the song &#8220;Helter
Skelter&#8221; from TThhee WWhhiittee AAllbbuumm by The Beatles. Whites would initially
fight blacks, but since half the whites would oppose fighting the blacks, the
whites would end up annihilating each other and only the blacks would be left.
And then the Manson family would be left to rule what was left of Mankind.

How would the Manson family survive the race war?

Manson speculated that they would ride out the storm in a hole in the ground in
Death Valley, in a place called The Bottomless Pit. In fact, family members
were looking for just such a place at the time of their arrest.

I&#8217;m sure the reader would never believe that both mass murderer Charles
Manson and academic professional Michael O&#8217;Hare could ever BOTH be quoted
in newspapers as saying the same thing, right?

But they were.

When Michael O&#8217;Hare was asked to respond to Gareth Penn&#8217;s
accusations by The Boston Herald in 1987, he was quoted in the article as
refusing to do so because there would never be an end to it.

Specifically, he said, &#8220;It&#8217;s a bottomless pit.&#8221;

A &#8220;bottomless pit&#8221; is about as close to a description of
Dante&#8217;s vision of Hell in _T_h_e_ _I_n_f_e_r_n_o as you are likely to get.

And no, I don&#8217;t think his wording was a coincidence.


Set Piece?

If you&#8217;re the Zodiac killer, operating in the years 1969-1970, is it
possible you&#8217;d find the notoriety of the Manson murders annoying?

Particularly the Hinman murder? Particularly when discovery of the Hinman
murder on July 31, 1969--the same date you mail The Cryptogram--and the
subsequent coverage of the Manson murders steals some of your thunder?

Don&#8217;t get me wrong.

I don&#8217;t think Michael, Gareth, Berta, and Hugh ever got emotional over
how their masterpiece was being received publicly.

But once the basic groundwork of The Zodiac Project had been established in the
summer and fall of 1969, they had the time and space to get creative.

The Zodiac killer had never been averse to responding to other events (TThhee
EExxoorrcciisstt movie, the Symbionese Liberation Army, a movie called BBaaddllaannddss about
serial killer Charles Starkweather) that might divert attention from his own
activities. The Zodiac Project was, among other things, a PR machine.

Is it possible the Zodiac killer would deliberately stage a murder to resemble
that of an infamous cult, just to make the point that it was the Zodiac who was
really deserving of all the attention?

The Salem murder, in other words, would be a set piece.


Ankh

So let&#8217;s return to our original assumption:

Robert Salem wasn&#8217;t killed by Stanley Dean Baker.

And no one else has been charged with his murder.

So . . . could he be a Zodiac victim?

Let&#8217;s look at the symbol he draws on the wall and on Salem&#8217;s
stomach.

An Egyptian ankh. Which is a symbol of life. It was commonly found on tombs in
ancient Egypt. It stood for eternal life.

For the afterlife.

And we know that the Zodiac killer is preoccupied with symbols such as the
Egyptian phoenix. Again, the idea is that when he dies, he will live forever.
So leaving the ankhs is consistent with what the Zodiac killer is doing.


Last Day

We&#8217;ve looked at two concepts from the ancient Egyptian religion, the
phoenix and the ankh.

I want now to look at a ceremony from the Roman pagan religion.

Remember what I&#8217;ve been saying about the Zodiac killer: He sacrifices
victims to place them at specific points on the landscape, to mark off his
designs.

The Roman religion does the same thing, except it uses the sacrifice ceremony
to mark off property. The ancient Romans were practical about everything,
including their religious beliefs. If they&#8217;d had cars, they&#8217;d have
had a god of parking meters. The god of border stones, marking off property,
was called Terminus. I&#8217;ll quote from Wikipedia:

IInn RRoommaann rreelliiggiioonn,, TTeerrmmiinnuuss wwaass tthhee ggoodd wwhhoo pprrootteecctteedd bboouunnddaarryy mmaarrkkeerrss;; hhiiss
nnaammee wwaass tthhee LLaattiinn wwoorrdd ffoorr ssuucchh aa mmaarrkkeerr.. SSaaccrriiffiicceess wweerree ppeerrffoorrmmeedd ttoo
ssaannccttiiffyy eeaacchh bboouunnddaarryy ssttoonnee,, aanndd llaannddoowwnneerrss cceelleebbrraatteedd aa ffeessttiivvaall ccaalllleedd tthhee
TTeerrmmiinnaalliiaa iinn TTeerrmmiinnuuss'' hhoonnoorr eeaacchh yyeeaarr oonn FFeebbrruuaarryy 2233..

February 23rd was the last day of the Roman calendar.
To write it with numbers, we use 2-23.

The last day.

On the last day, the marker stones laid will be consecrated by a victim's
blood.

The last day of our own calendar is December 31st. We write it 12-31.

The Napa Car Wash, from which the Zodiac called the police in Napa, was at 1231
Main Street.

The San Franciscan Hotel, which Salem&#8217;s studio was behind, was at 1231
Mission Street.


Death Date

When did Robert Salem die?

His body was found, because it was decomposing and people in the back rooms of
the hotel were complaining about the smell, on Sunday, April 19, 1970.

So we can be sure he was killed quite some time before that.
But when, exactly?

The medical examiner&#8217;s guess was April 12th, but the intense heat inside
the apartment would have blurred any estimate.

Here&#8217;s the interesting thing:

Three of the Zodiac victims have the word EASTER in their names.

Remember, I said Easter is the finished product of Dante&#8217;s Inferno.

Easter Sunday in 1970 was March 29.

Obviously, that date would be a plausible day for Salem to have died. It is
also the exact midpoint between the deaths of Shelly Holmboe and Donna Lass.

SShheellllyy HHoollmmbbooee
RRoobbeerrtt SSaalleemmDDoonnnnaa LLaassss
OOccttoobbeerr 1199,, 11996699((2233 wweeeekkss))MMaarrcchh 2299,, 11997700((2233 wweeeekkss))SSeepptteemmbbeerr 66,, 11997700


Remember, I don&#8217;t need the Robert Salem murder to make my case. Because
the distance between the Holmboe murder and the Donna Lass murder is still
exactly 46 weeks, which is 2 x 23. But if Salem is murdered on Easter Sunday,
now you&#8217;ve got three &#8220;secret&#8221; Zodiac victims whose murder
dates are connected by two 23-week intervals which flank Easter Sunday.

In other words, symmetry.



Pre-Obituary Article

An article on Robert Salem (&#8220;The Lamplighter of Stevenson Street&#8221;),
written while he was still alive, was published on March 30, 1969 in The San
Francisco Examiner&#8217;s Sunday edition.



Again, if Salem was murdered on March 29th, that would be the 365th day since
the Salem article. It was, in effect, the last day of a year beginning with
that article. So the murder of Robert Salem on that date would be another way
of invoking the Terminus and 2-23.

It&#8217;s interesting that the Salem murder would thus turn the normal Zodiac
killer sequence on its head: instead of him killing a victim and then writing
to the newspapers about it, in this case the murder would FOLLOW an article
about the victim in the newspaper.

Very often during The Zodiac Project there are little hints and clues such as
The Examiner article which, in effect, say, &#8220;If you just look at the
information that&#8217;s available on this person, you may be able to figure
all this out.&#8221; That never happened because everyone assumed he was
killing people randomly, which in at least a couple of cases (Cheri Bates and
Darlene Ferrin, because conventional evidence shows he was stalking them
personally) we know wasn&#8217;t true.


Lamplighter

The SF Examiner article on Robert Salem that was published on March 30, 1969 in
the Sunday edition was entitled, &#8220;The Lamplighter Of Stevenson
Street.&#8221;

The Zodiac killer twice used a song from Gilbert and Sullivan&#8217;s
&#8220;The Mikado&#8221; (in the July 25th, 1970 Mikado Letter, and in the
January 29th, 1974 Exorcist Letter).

The Examiner calls Salem &#8220;The Lamplighter of Stevenson Street&#8221;.

The name of the Gilbert & Sullivan troupe in San Francisco?

The Lamp Lighters.


Satan Saves

What about the message on the wall?
I mean, besides the name ZODIAC?

SSAATTAANN
SSAAVVEESS

Those two words are alliterative, just like the words on the wall at the Hinman
murder.

PPOOLLIITTIICCAALL
PPIIGGGGIIEE

What&#8217;s even more interesting is that you have three words connected to
this particular murder that consist of five letters (remembering that
pentagrams are associated with Satan), and all three words start with &#8216;S-
A&#8217;.

SSAATTAANN
SSAAVVEESS
SSAALLEEMM

If we put those first two letters in columns like an acrostic and add up their
alphabet numbers, we get an interesting result.

SS 1199 AA 11 TTAANN
SS 1199 AA 11 VVEESS
_SS_ _++_11_99_ _AA_ _++_11_ _LL_EE_MM
5577 33

5577..33

57.3 is about as close an approximation as you can get to the radian angle
value, 57.29DEG.


South Leg Sub-Radian

If this seems a stretch (and I&#8217;m sure it does), note also that the Salem
murder is a sub-radian off the south leg of the Mt. Diablo radian.

Here is an illustration page from my book (Illustration #60, obviously), which
features the south leg of The Mt. Diablo Radian superimposed over a USGS
quadrangle map page which includes Presidio Heights and Chinatown, "San
Francisco North". The south leg comes in from the right (east), and ends at the
intersection of Washington & Cherry Streets:




Here is the same map page, now showing two additional points, 739 Clay Street,
the site of BM 54, the only USGS benchmark on the south leg of The Mt. Diablo
Radian, and the Robert Salem murder site (his apartment/studio on Stevenson
Street).

If one draws a line from BM 54 in Dragon Plaza to the Salem murder scene on
Stevenson Street, that line creates another radian, a sub-radian:



It also makes the Mt. Diablo Radian symmetrical, in terms of the number of
murders on each:

North Leg: David Faraday + Betty Lou Jensen + Darlene Ferrin = 3

South Leg: Paul Stine + Donna Lass + Robert Salem = 3


Robert Salem Review

I will cite more reasons to believe the Salem murder was authored by the Zodiac
killer later in the book. In the meantime, let&#8217;s review:


11.. SSttaannlleeyy DDeeaann BBaakkeerr wwaass ccoonnvviicctteedd ooff tthhee JJaammeess SScchhlloosssseerr mmuurrddeerr..

22.. BBaakkeerr wwaass nneevveerr eevveenn cchhaarrggeedd iinn tthhee SSaalleemm mmuurrddeerr..

33.. TThhee SSaalleemm aanndd SScchhlloosssseerr mmuurrddeerrss ddoonn&&##88221177;;tt rreesseemmbbllee eeaacchh ootthheerr..

44.. TThhee SSaalleemm mmuurrddeerr iiss aa ccooppyy ooff tthhee GGaarryy HHiinnmmaann ((MMaannssoonn)) mmuurrddeerr..

55.. TThhee SSaalleemm mmuurrddeerr iiss aa sseett ppiieeccee,, ssiiggnneedd bbyy tthhee ZZOODDIIAACC..

66.. TThhee aannkkhh ddrraawwnn iinn bblloooodd iiss aa ssyymmbbooll ooff ddeeaatthh--aanndd--rreebbiirrtthh..

77.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr vviiccttiimm--ppllaacceemmeenntt rreesseemmbblleess tthhee RRoommaann TTeerrmmiinnuuss cceerreemmoonnyy..

88.. TThhee TTeerrmmiinnuuss cceerreemmoonnyy ssaaccrriiffiicceedd aanniimmaallss ttoo sseett bboorrddeerr ssttoonneess..

99.. TThhee TTeerrmmiinnuuss cceerreemmoonnyy ttooookk ppllaaccee oonn tthhee llaasstt ddaayy ooff tthhee ccaalleennddaarr yyeeaarr..

1100.. TThhee llaasstt ddaayy ooff tthhee RRoommaann yyeeaarr wwaass FFeebbrruuaarryy 2233rrdd,, 22--2233..

1111.. TThhee llaasstt ddaayy ooff oouurr mmooddeerrnn yyeeaarr iiss DDeecceemmbbeerr 3311sstt,, 1122--3311..

1122.. TThhee SSaann FFrraanncciissccaann HHootteell iiss aatt 11223311 MMiissssiioonn SSttrreeeett..

1133.. TThhee pphhoonnee ccaallll ttoo tthhee ppoolliiccee iinn NNaappaa wwaass ffrroomm 11223311 MMaaiinn SSttrreeeett..

1144.. RRoobbeerrtt SSaalleemm mmaayy hhaavvee bbeeeenn mmuurrddeerreedd oonn EEaasstteerr SSuunnddaayy,, MMaarrcchh 2299,, 11997700..

1155.. EEaasstteerr 11997700 iiss tthhee mmiiddppooiinntt bbeettwweeeenn tthhee HHoollmmbbooee aanndd LLaassss mmuurrddeerrss..

1166.. EEaasstteerr 11997700 bbiisssseeccttss tthhee 4466 wweeeekkss bbeettwweeeenn HHoollmmbbooee aanndd LLaassss&&##88221122;;22 xx 2233..

1177.. MMaarrcchh 2299,, 11997700 wwaass tthhee llaasstt ddaayy ooff aa yyeeaarr aafftteerr tthhee EExxaammiinneerr aarrttiiccllee..

1188.. TThhee aarrttiiccllee&&##88221177;;ss kkeeyywwoorrdd&&##88221122;;LLaammppLLiigghhtteerr&&##88221122;;rreeffeerreenncceess GGiillbbeerrtt aanndd
SSuulllliivvaann..

1199.. SSAATTAANN,, SSAAVVEESS,, aanndd SSAALLEEMM aadddd uupp aaccrroossttiiccaallllyy ttoo 5577..33,, aa rraaddiiaann..

2200.. TThhee mmuurrddeerr ssiittee iiss aa rraaddiiaann ooffff tthhee ssoouutthh lleegg ooff tthhee MMtt.. DDiiaabblloo rraaddiiaann..

2211.. TThhee SSaalleemm mmuurrddeerr mmaakkeess tthhee MMtt.. DDiiaabblloo RRaaddiiaann ssyymmmmeettrriiccaall..



_1_9_7_0_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s

Content copyright
. Raymond Grant. All rights reserved.

_[_W_e_b_ _H_o_s_t_i_n_g_]
