














The Zodiac Murders--Solved!
my other website: _Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _K_i_l_l_e_r_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e
you tube videos:_Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _k_i_l_l_e_r_ _s_o_l_v_e_d
Your Subtitle text
    * _H_o_m_e_ _P_a_g_e
    * _I_n_t_r_o_ _S_e_c_t_i_o_n
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e
    * _V_a_l_l_e_j_o
    * _C_r_y_p_t_o_g_r_a_m
    * _L_a_k_e_ _B_e_r_r_y_e_s_s_a
    * _P_r_e_s_i_d_i_o_ _H_e_i_g_h_t_s
    * _S_h_e_l_l_y_ _H_o_l_m_b_o_e
    * _3_4_0
    * _J_o_h_n_s_ _&_ _S_a_l_e_m
    * _1_9_7_0_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _D_o_n_n_a_ _L_a_s_s
    * _1_9_7_4
    * _1_9_8_0_/_1_9_8_1
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _A_r_t_i_c_l_e_s
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_1
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_2
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_4
    * _W_h_a_t_'_s_ _N_e_w
                        ************ PPrreessiiddiioo HHeeiigghhttss ************

From David Fincher's ZZooddiiaacc, the DVD commentary over The School Bus Threat
Letter:

Brad Fischer (producer): I mean, this is, this is a guy with some serious
confidence who just barely escaped on a fluke because the description was
incorrect!

James Vanderbilt (producer and screenwriter): Serious confidence but also, I
mean, you know, really just a lucky bastard. I mean, he should have been, this
is not, you know, and this was something we kind of came back to over and over
again, as as you know Brad, Dave, and I, I can't remember who coined it, but
had this, uh, this phrase, "Wily Coyote Super-Genius", and it's sort of this
idea, and we, we make fun of Robert, uh, Graysmith in the film for it because
there is this tendency and Graysmith has it and a lot of, you know, other
people who are interested in the case have it to kind of go, "This guy was
Professor Moriarity, he was the greatest villain--"

Brad Fischer [laughing]: He was the most brilliant serial killer ever!

James Vanderbilt: --and he wasn't. He was a guy who got really lucky, and and
and so you know, constantly wanted to constantly kind of deflate it. You know
what I mean?

I'm sorry, guys, I guess I DON'T know what you mean. Maybe if the three of you
had used a better metaphor than Wily Coyote, who was a notorious failure, and
instead used, I don't know, maybe "Road Runner Super-Genius", since the Road
Runner always got away . . . kind of, you know, like the Zodiac killer? That
you're the professional writer, and I'm the amateur, should tell you all you
need to know about Hollywood. Needless to say, I don't agree with the Fischer-
Vanderbilt version of the Zodiac killer, which I will allude to here as "The
Zodiac As Mr. Magoo".

Mr. Magoo was a nearsighted, nearly blind cartoon character who otherwise lived
a charmed life. If Magoo was about to walk off a bridge into space, a crane
would suddenly appear, hoisting an I-beam. Magoo would somehow step smoothly
onto the I-beam and cross it without missing a step, and at the other end of
the I-beam a truck would pass by, and Magoo would walk across the top of the
truck, which was passing under another bridge, and Magoo would continue off the
top of the truck onto the walkway of the bridge, and so forth, all the while
huffing and puffing about what this crazy world was coming to these days. The
humor in the Mr. Magoo cartoon was in how he somehow managed to stroll through
the landscape without incident, while completely oblivious to his unfailing
good fortune and even cranky about his treatment.

I'm not sure which real-life serial killer most resembles Mr. Magoo--maybe Ed
Gein, the basis in fact for the fictional Norman Bates and Dr. Hannibal Lecter.
Unlike his Hollywood counterparts, who were neurotics (at least, most of the
time), Ed Gein was psychotic, and able to avoid capture only as long as he
remained inside his own little world. Once he ventured outside it, the police
were quickly able to figure out, from his bizarre affect, how he kept himself
busy.

I don't think Mr. Magoo would survive long as a serial killer. Those who think
he resembles the Zodiac killer say he's remained unknown because he was
institutionalized, either in prison or in a mental hospital. I don't think
either of those scenarios is likely. People who lose their freedom also lose
control of their privacy, and a psychotic who was the Zodiac killer would have
been found out, either because his belongings included items the Zodiac killer
was likely to have (such as crime scene souvenirs and Zodiac weapons) or
because his bizarre behavior would have created suspicion.

I think the Zodiac killer escaped capture precisely because he WASN'T just a
lucky bastard. I believe he planned everything he did well in advance and did
local research about what was likely to happen, and when you do that, you
greatly increase your odds of avoiding capture.


Presidio Heights Facts

Paul Stine was already on his way to a fare on 9th Avenue when the Zodiac
killer flagged him down in the theatre district on Saturday night, October 11,
1969.

Stine wrote &#8216;Washington & Maple&#8217; in Presidio Heights in his trip
book, but when they arrived at that corner, the Zodiac killer apparently
instructed him to go another block, to Washington & Cherry. After Stine pulled
over and put the car in PARK, the Zodiac killer grabbed him from behind and
fired a bullet through his skull.

The Zodiac killer then exited the cab and got into the front seat through the
passenger side door. He got back out a minute or so later and wiped down the
outside of the cab, in the process leaving two bloody fingerprints of his own
on the driver&#8217;s side door separator. He then began walking down Cherry
Street.

Two SFPD radio car cops apparently saw the Zodiac killer as he reached Jackson
& Maple, but the APB had mistakenly specified a Black Male Adult, so they let
him continue on his way.


Virgin Victims 1

There&#8217;s a term teenage boys use to describe a virginal girl. They say
she&#8217;s &#8216;cherry&#8217;. There&#8217;s also a song by Jan and Dean,
&#8220;Surf City&#8221;, which describes a &#8217;30 Ford wagon:

YYoouu kknnooww iitt&&##88221177;;ss nnoott vveerryy cchheerrrryy
IItt&&##88221177;;ss aann oollddiiee--bbuutt--aa--ggooooddiiee

Pagan ritual specifies that the sacrificed human victim be a virgin. And the
Zodiac killer goes to the trouble, at Lake Berryessa, of dressing up in costume
not unlike a medieval executioner. Throughout the Zodiac Project, the victims
are dealt with in a ritualistic manner, either in the way they are selected, or
killed, or both. For example, all three Sunday victims (Cheri Bates, Shelly
Holmboe, and Robert Salem) are stabbed to death and nearly decapitated, which
is the traditional method of killing a pagan sacrifice victim.

The Zodiac killer had Paul Stine drive an extra block from Washington and Maple
so that the cabbie could then become a suitable &#8220;virginal&#8221; victim
at Washington and CHERRY. He CAN&#8217;T kill Stine at Washington & Maple
because it&#8217;s not an appropriate place, and he asks for Washington & Maple
when he gets in the cab so he can demonstrate this to the world. The world
wasn&#8217;t paying attention, but that&#8217;s not his fault!

When he kidnaps Kathleen Johns in March 1970, the entire episode is a
demonstration of what he CAN&#8217;T do, which is why Johns survives. More on
that when the time comes.


Virgin Victims 2

Let&#8217;s take a second look at some of these &#8220;virgin&#8221; victims:

1, We don&#8217;t know if Miss Bates was a virgin, but she definitely was
CHERI.

2, The two teenagers at Lake Herman Road were likely virgins.

3, Darlene Ferrin, who was already married to her second husband and out in a
car with a man who wasn&#8217;t her husband, can safely be ruled out as a
virgin. However, she had recently returned from a vacation trip to the Virgin
Islands, and she lived on Virginia Avenue.

4, Cecelia Ann Shepard was a devout churchgoing young woman, and in spite of
the cozy scene in David Fincher&#8217;s movie ZZooddiiaacc, had no intimate
relationship with Bryan Hartnell, the man she was with at the time of her
murder. She was just 20 years old and very likely a virgin.

5, The one-year-old toddler, Shelly Holmboe, was certainly a virgin.

6, Robert Salem&#8217;s last name evokes ritual and witchcraft and the burning
at the stake of young girls who were, in most cases, literally innocent.

7, Donna Lass, kidnapped from the Sahara Hotel, had a last name which means a
young, virginal girl in the Scottish or Cornish highlands, the typical pagan
sacrifice victim.


Front Seat 1

When the Zodiac killer got into the front seat of Paul Stine&#8217;s cab, he
did at least four things, which I will enumerate a section at a time. Am I
engaging in pure speculation again, as I did in assuming that Cheri Bates was
actually kidnapped and never went into the RCC library? Perhaps. But
let&#8217;s walk through the Zodiac killer&#8217;s post-mortem (as far as the
victim was concerned) actions at the cab, and see if I can make sense of what
he did:

I have no way of knowing for sure what the Zodiac killer did in the front seat
of Paul Stine&#8217;s cab. Witnesses saw him get into the passenger side of the
front seat, but what he did once he was inside, only one person knows for sure.
But we know he pulled the tail of Stine&#8217;s shirt out of his pants and
hacked off a piece with a knife, because he subsequently sent rectangles of the
garment to authenticate his letters.

If you recall my saying that the Zodiac killer was spelling his name,
here&#8217;s a major clue in that direction. Why does he have to risk being
caught at the cab by taking time to hack off Stine&#8217;s shirt? There&#8217;s
a much easier and less dangerous way of linking all his crimes, and yet, for
some reason, he chooses not to take that path of least resistance. Why?


Front Seat 2

We know, of course, that the Zodiac killer also took Paul Stine&#8217;s wallet.
We can probably assume he did it to be able to prove his guilt later on. But
the Zodiac killer&#8217;s taking possession of the wallet disproves an
assumption made by Robert Graysmith. Graysmith has said that the Zodiac killer
used a different gun each time because he ditched the gun shortly after each
murder, so he wouldn&#8217;t be found with the murder weapon on him. To which I
say, What good would it do you to ditch the gun, if you&#8217;ve kept a
souvenir from the crime scene&#8212;in particular, the victim&#8217;s blood-
soaked wallet?

Another obvious problem with the gun-ditching scenario is that it allows the
gun to possibly be traced back to its owner, if found.


Front Seat 3

We also know he pulled Paul Stine&#8217;s dead body over onto the passenger
seat before he exited the cab. He must have, because even if Stine had slumped
onto the passenger seat after he was shot, the Zodiac killer would have had to
push him back over toward the driver&#8217;s side in order to get into the
front seat himself. If you look at photos of the crime scene, you will notice
that Stine&#8217;s torso has been pulled to the passenger side, in such a way
that his arm hangs out the door. It's possible that the morgue stewards moved
the body, but patrolman Armand Pelissetti, first on the scene, describes
Stine's torso as being on the passenger side with his head touching the floor.
If you read the section on the Vallejo passengers, you know why this was done.


Front Seat 4

I believe the Zodiac killer did one other thing while he was in the front seat
of Paul Stine&#8217;s cab, and though I can&#8217;t offer proof of what
I&#8217;m suggesting, it fits both the physical evidence and the Zodiac
killer&#8217;s methodology. He removed Paul Stine&#8217;s own metal-banded
wrist watch and replaced it with a black-banded Timex, exactly like the one
left at the Riverside murder scene, which had been stopped at 12:22. The
Presidio Heights Timex, if it is ever recovered among Paul Stine&#8217;s
effects, will be found to have been stopped at 1:46.

TToosscchhii hhaadd nnoottiicceedd ttwwoo lloonngg ddaarrkk mmaarrkkss oonn SSttiinnee''ss lleefftt hhaanndd.. PPeerrhhaappss hhee hhaadd
tthhrroowwnn uupp hhiiss hhaanndd ttoo pprrootteecctt hhiimmsseellff ffrroomm tthhee gguunn bbllaasstt..Robert Graysmith,
ZZooddiiaacc, page 91 of the hardcover edition

The act of pulling the metal band off Stine&#8217;s wrist caused long dark
scrapes on the skin of his forearm, which were noticed by SFPD Inspector Dave
Toschi. The blood of a dead person is no longer pumping through his body, thus
any rough treatment of the skin post-mortem will leave a mark. This Timex--the
one planted by the Zodiac killer--is clearly visible in photos of the scene
showing Stine&#8217;s hand hanging out the cab.

Incidentally, David Faraday was also wearing a black-banded Timex at the time
of his death, so it&#8217;s possible that one was also planted by the Zodiac
killer. I&#8217;m choosing Paul Stine as the more likely plant-recipient
because there were dark scratches on his forearm/wrist area, but either or both
could have received new timepieces from the Zodiac killer.

By the way, it&#8217;s probably of some significance that we know Timexes
&#8220;take a licking but keep on ticking&#8221;, but in the case of the Zodiac
killer&#8217;s planting of stopped Timexes, he was strapping them onto victims
who themselves were no longer ticking. I suspect he left a watch by Cheri
Bates&#8217;s body, instead of putting it on her wrist, because it was more
likely to be taken note of if police assumed it belonged to her assailant.
Whereas leaving a watch beside David Faraday or Paul Stine would have begged
the question of how the killer happened to lose it.

It also would have been a less subtle clue.


Misidentification

SFPD misidentified the slug from the gun, most likely because it sustained
significant damage colliding with Paul Stine&#8217;s skull. It was NOT from a
.9mm.

[Rust] ffoouunndd aa ccooppppeerr--jjaacckkeetteedd sslluugg,, bbaaddllyy mmiisssshhaappeenn bbuutt rreeccooggnniizzaabbllee aass aa 99--
mmmm.. oorr ..3388 ccaalliibbeerr.. Robert Graysmith, ZZooddiiaacc, page 32 of the hardcover edition

Clearly, a 9mm or .38 slug could easily be mistaken for each other, even by
forensic personnel. Someone recently pointed out to me that the original San
Francisco Chronicle story misidentified the 9-mm slug as a .38. I believe the
misidentification was in the other direction, but in any case, the SFC reporter
wouldn't have made up the gun typing while he was writing the story; if he
reported a gun type, it's because that's what his source, SFPD, gave him.

In the Zodiac killer&#8217;s &#8220;Mt. Diablo Letter&#8221; of June 26, 1970,
he states

II sshhoott aa mmaann ssiittttiinngg iinn
aa ppaarrkkeedd ccaarr wwiitthh aa ..3388..

The Zodiac killer was NOT, as SFPD has stated, taking credit for a murder he
did not commit (Officer Richard Radetich had been shot in a parked police car
just prior to the &#8220;Mt. Diablo Letter&#8221; mailing). Instead, the Zodiac
killer was correcting the gun typing for the Presidio Heights murder, from 9mm.
to .38. The &#8220;man sitting in a parked car&#8221; was actually Paul Stine,
who had put his cab in PARK just prior to being shot in the back of the head.
The Zodiac killer was saying, &#8220;I didn&#8217;t use a 9mm. I used a
.38.&#8221;

Reporter Paul Avery would supposedly tell Gareth Penn, at a conference in the
early 1980s, that the original gun identification had been a mistake.
Presumably, SFPD never corrected the gun ID publicly for the same reason they
changed the 20 symbols in The Cryptogram, so they would have yet another
&#8220;key&#8221; they could use to catch the real killer.

This corrected information tells us at least two things:

1, the gun numbers themselves mean something; and

2, the other gun numbers&#8212;22 (Lake Herman), 9mm (Blue Rock Springs), and
.45 (Lake Berryessa) are all correct, because the Zodiac didn&#8217;t publicly
correct them as he did with the Presidio Heights gun number.

So we now have a corrected chronological sequence of gun numbers&#8212;22, 9,
45, and 38&#8212;that would seem to be important to the killer. What could they
possibly spell out?


Gun Numbers 1

Does it strike anyone out there that the Zodiac killer was going to absolutely
absurd lengths to connect his murders? If you just killed someone on a street
corner in an upscale part of town&#8212;where the cops are going to respond
quickly to any emergency call--would you take the time to get into the bloody
front seat of his car and hack off a piece of his shirt while the cops were
redlining to the murder scene, just so you could later take credit for it?

What&#8217;s wrong with this picture?

In 1973-1974, a group of Black Muslims began randomly shooting white victims in
San Francisco in what came to be called the Zebra murders. Even though
different gunmen were involved in each crime, the murders were connected
because they were all committed using the same gun. Police can do a ballistics
match in a matter of hours. So why wouldn&#8217;t the Zodiac killer just use
the same gun each time, and save himself all that extra work? What&#8217;s the
down side of using the same gun each time?

Well, as I said earlier, you can&#8217;t be ditching the gun for the reason
Robert Graysmith suggested, to avoid being caught with it on you, when
you&#8217;ve just taken the victim&#8217;s bloody wallet with you (not to
mention wearing his blood on your clothes).

Remember, the Zodiac killer sent messages every time he did something. And you
can&#8217;t send a message, even where numbers take the place of letters in a
substitution sequence, by merely repeating the same number.


Gun Numbers 2

Okay, if the reader hasn&#8217;t figured it out already, time&#8217;s up. I
gave you enough hints!

_TT_hh_ee_ _CC_rr_ii_mm_ee_ _TT_hh_ee_ _WW_ee_aa_pp_oo_nn
LLaakkee HHeerrmmaann RRooaadd ..2222 rriiffllee
BBlluuee RRoocckk SSpprriinnggss 99mmmm.. hhaanndd gguunn
LLaakkee BBeerrrryyeessssaa ..4455 hhaanndd gguunn
PPrreessiiddiioo HHeeiigghhttss ..3388 hhaanndd ggun

Yes, I&#8217;m aware that the victims at Lake Berryessa weren&#8217;t shot.
They weren&#8217;t shot because he had to stab them 17 times to identify
himself by knife. But the Zodiac killer still showed them a gun which Bryan
Hartnell identified in public accounts of the encounter as a .45. So the Zodiac
was satisfied that that number&#8212;45&#8212;had gotten out.

Now we have a numerical sequence from someone who loves to turn letters into
numbers and numbers into letters. Plus, we have to assume the gun sequence is
of prime importance, right?

So what could it possibly spell?

2222 99 4455 3388

Let&#8217;s begin where we always do, by using basic alphabet substitution.
Since we have numbers above 26, we&#8217;ll use a repeating sequence, where
A=27, B=28, and so forth. This gives us

2222 99 4455 3388
VV II SS LL

Could Elvis be the Zodiac killer? I thought the Zodiac killer was High Class,
but maybe that was just a lie? Anyway, there&#8217;s no Mister E, right?
Let&#8217;s try something else!


Gun Numbers 3

2222 99 4455 3388
VV II SS LL

Okay, Elvis probably wasn&#8217;t the Zodiac killer. You don&#8217;t always get
things on your first crack.

2222 99 4455 3388

Alphabet substitution is the most basic form of number-to-letter code. The
second most basic is reverse alphabet numbers. In other words, Z=1, Y=2, X=3,
and so forth. Converting the four gun numbers using this repeating sequence
gives us

2222 99 4455 3388
EE RR HH OO

I don&#8217;t think it&#8217;s difficult to see ERHO as a form of OHARE
backwards. And spelling his name backwards would make sense, since the binary
form of pi spells M.ERAHO. But then why remove the central A?

It&#8217;s done to repeat the overall pattern, again using alphabet numbers.

EE RR HH OO
55 ++1188 == 2233 88 ++ 1155 == 2233

The Zodiac killer&#8217;s gun numbers, in sequence, spell his name backwards.
They actually spell a form of his last name which converts to 23/23. And again,
I don&#8217;t think that&#8217;s a coincidence.


Modus Operandi

Right around this point in David Fincher&#8217;s movie, ZZooddiiaacc, about 40
minutes into the movie, both newspaper men (Paul Avery and Robert Graysmith)
and both police investigators (Dave Toschi and Bill Armstrong) begin discussing
patterns in the Zodiac murders. There are no fingerprints at Lake Herman Road,
Blue Rock Springs, or Lake Berryessa or in any of the letters&#8212;then the
Zodiac killer leaves prints in blood on the cab at Presidio Heights, taking his
gloves off to do so. At Lake Herman Road, he kills both victims, but then only
kills the female at Blue Rock Springs and Lake Berryessa while wounding the
males. He attacks couples in lovers lanes&#8212;but Paul Stine breaks that
pattern.

Think about it, reader.

If you kept doing the same thing over and over, police and reporters would not
take time to analyze your pattern, because you wouldn&#8217;t be varying it.
You call attention to your modus operandi by varying it. The Zodiac killer does
things differently each time to call attention to his m. o.. And we know that
everything he calls attention to identifies him somehow. Well, what could be
self-identifying about an m. o.?

And what are Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s initials, anyway?


Car Costume

A cab is a car that's wearing a yellow costume.

Sort of like what the Zodiac killer was doing at Lake Berryessa.

I discussed the gun sequence. Anytime you have a sequence of transmissions, you
can send a message; if you have more than one sequence, you can send more than
one message.


Car Sequence

If the Presidio Heights homicide is the end of the public murders, the Zodiac
killer does the final one in a car that's wearing a costume. San Francisco cabs
were, I believe, Chevrolet Chevelles. But I suspect the cab is intended to
stand for Michael O'Hare's costumed self. Thus, what precedes the cab is his
real self.

If he can send a message with guns, he can send one with cars. After all, he
was picking victims from the state vehicular data base. Let's look at which
vehicles his victims were driving:

CChheerrii BBaatteess DDaavviidd FFaarraaddaayy DDaarrlleennee FFeerrrriinn BBrryyaann HHaarrttnneellll PPaauull SSttiinnee
VVoollkksswwaaggeenn RRaammbblleerr CChheevvrroolleett VVoollkksswwaaggeenn TTaaxxiiCCaabb
2222 1188 33 2222 ----

Note, again, that the two DFs represent mirror-image crimes, so we'll add those
together.

2222 1188 ++ 33 == 2211 2222

Note that this is a palindrome that spells out Michael O'Hare's birthdate,
forward and backward.

2222 ++ 2211 ++ 2222

2222 // 4433

4433 // 2222

Both represent January 22, 1943, the 22nd day of '43 (22-43).

The gun numbers sequence spells out his name. The car sequence spells out his
DOB.


Luck

Just how lucky was the Zodiac killer? Even if you limit yourself to the four
public SF Bay Area murder-events, he seemed to be extremely lucky. As
investigators pointed out, there was about a six minute window for him to have
committed the murders on Lake Herman Road and not be seen by anyone driving by.
He manages to avoid police at Blue Rock Springs, even though a patrol car had
been out in that parking lot a half-hour before. And, in San Francisco, he
stays at the car for a minute or two after shooting the driver, and then
strolls through the neighborhood with police cars redlining past him . . . and
the only thing that seems to save him from capture is the misidentification of
the suspect as a Black Male Adult.

If you're like me, and you don't buy into The Zodiac As Mr. Magoo scenario,
it's all very spooky.

Of course . . . if a killer is bright enough to appear to move the victims
around, and move their cars around, and time everything with great serendipity
. . . would it be a stretch to assume that he's also moving the cops around,
too?

Don't get me wrong. As we learned from watching The Alfred Hitchcock Hour back
in the 1950s, the best-laid plans of killers often fall prey to happenstance,
the sudden unexpected appearance of the mailman (I thought I'd sneak that image
in here somewhere), and just bad luck, and no amount of planning is going to do
away with the element of surprise. The Zodiac conspirators must have resigned
themselves to the possibility that the entire project was subject to the law of
chance. But . . .

There's a lot you can do to avoid bad luck, if you spend enough time thinking
things through in advance. As James Siegel says near the end of his excellent
novel, DDeerraaiilleedd, Fate laughs at people with a Plan, but smiles on those who
bring a Back-Up Plan.

The six minutes at Lake Herman Road, and the avoidance of patrol cars at Blue
Rock Springs? With the logistical expertise of Hugh Penn, and a police radio,
you can strike when the cops are busy elsewhere (as they were in both cases).
And you can minimize your own vulnerability.

As a Chicago homicide detective recently pointed out on ZKF (before being
banned from the site), the Zodiac killer APPEARED to time his attacks so they'd
take place during police shift changes, or on weekends when more experienced
personnel were off.

At Lake Herman Road, the Zodiac killer is there long enough to kill the two
teenagers, and then he's gone. At Blue Rock Springs, though he comes back to
the car (for reasons I've already given--to spread W-Ws all over) a second
time, he is otherwise economical in his movements and probably spends no longer
than a minute or so in that clearing. He has more to do at Lake Berryessa, and
the area is remote, but he still moves quickly and gets himself out of there
after just a few minutes.

In Presidio Heights, he appears to have taken some crazy chances. But did he?

Let's consider what I think are the two most likely scenarios:


Presidio Scenario 1

The Zodiac killer was last seen walking down Cherry Street that Saturday night.
We know he turned the corner and disappeared into the darkness. I submit that
anything said about his activity beyond that point is pure speculation. Since I
believe the Zodiac killer was Michael O'Hare, and since I say he always
intended to kill Paul Stine at the corner of Washington and Cherry Streets,
there would have been absolutely no reason for him to stroll through the
neighborhood.

Since we now know that he didn't change his mind about where the murder would
be, he wouldn't have any need to double back toward Maple Street. He'd have
parked his car on Cherry Street and made his way to Geary Street by bus (Robert
Graysmith speculates as much on page 82 of the hardcover ZZooddiiaacc, except for not
thinking the car was parked specifically on Cherry Street). His car, I believe,
would have been parked just far enough down the street to avoid having it seen
by someone witnessing the crime. He'd have walked down the street, gotten into
the car, and been miles away by the time Armond Pelissetti pulled up at the
corner.

How do I explain Donald Fouke's testimony, given that scenario? There's no need
to. As Pelissetti said, Fouke probably did NOT see the Zodiac killer, even if
he believes he did. Fouke says he passed a man on Jackson Street walking in an
easterly direction on the north side of the street. Fouke's squad car was going
about 40mph, and slowed to 25mph long enough to ascertain that the man was
white, not black, and then sped on. The entire incident lasted 15 seconds,
tops. Fouke's primary concern, while looking at the man, was his color, and yet
he gives a full description of the man's outfit, which did not include any
blood (which the Zodiac killer would have been covered with). Fouke is the only
Zodiac eyewitness who describes him as a man 35-45; everyone else (Michael
Mageau, the teenagers on Washington, and Kathleen Johns) describe a man in his
20s. Fouke says he submitted his version of events a month later. But it would
have been known to everyone in the SFPD that the Zodiac killer had committed
the crime the following Tuesday. Why would he wait an entire month?

How do I explain the Zodiac killer's saying he was stopped and talked to by the
police? Fouke eventually told Pelissetti that he thought he stopped the Zodiac
killer, in which case that story would have spread through the law enforcement
community like wildfire. The Zodiac killer would have been aware of it because
Hugh Penn would have heard about it, and he could have made up the part about
being stopped by police because that's what the rumor buzzing about the Bay
Area police agencies was.

Wasn't the Zodiac killer lucky that the dispatcher said Black Male Adult?
Maybe, but it might be interesting to see the statistics on cab hold-ups in San
Francisco back then, just to see what percentage were committed by black men. I
tend to believe that the very phrase CAB HOLD-UP would have suggested a black
suspect to SFPD personnel. In any case, if Michael O'Hare had parked on Cherry
Street and driven away immediately after leaving the cab, it never mattered
what the APB description of him was, right or wrong.

Scenario #1 makes a lot of sense to me; it's logical, and it explains
everything.

But I have to reject it because . . . because I don't think it's what the
Zodiac killer would do.

I think what really happened is Scenario #2.


Presidio Scenario 2

Michael O'Hare leaves the cab between 9:50pm and 9:55pm and begins walking down
Cherry Street. Behind him, a few minutes later, Armond Pelissetti arrives at
Washington & Cherry (supposedly at 9:55pm, but the call from the teenagers on
Washington is logged at 9:58pm, so 10pm or later is probably more like it).
Meanwhile, Donald Fouke has heard the initial APB about a cab robbery/shooting
by a Black Male Adult and begins driving at 35-40mph down Jackson Street toward
Cherry. As he drives through the intersection at Maple he sees Michael O'Hare
on the far side of the intersection, on the north side of the street, walking
in the direction of Maple. Fouke slows the cab down long enough to ascertain
that Michael O'Hare is white, not black, and hits the accelerator again,
leaving O'Hare to dwindle in his rear-view mirror, though he does notice that
O'Hare avoids looking at the police car and begins walking up a flight of steps
just as the police speed away.

When Fouke turns the corner at Jackson & Cherry, he runs into Armond Pelissetti
pursuing the suspect on foot. Pelissetti corrects the APB description, saying
the suspect is a White Male Adult. Fouke says that he then swore and told
Pelissetti that he had seen the killer on Jackson Street; Pelissetti says Fouke
said nothing about having seen a suspect that evening, but subsequently did
admit to seeing a man who may have been the Zodiac killer.

Almost a month later, the Zodiac killer writes a letter in which he describes
the police stopping him on the street about three minutes after the shooting
and asking him if he had seen anything suspicious. The Zodiac killer replies
that he saw a man waving a gun and the police speed off in the direction he
indicates. A day or so following receipt of this letter, Fouke finally submits
an account of his sighting a suspect on Jackson Street (but not speaking to
him).

What happened? Everyone who has reported on the police reaction that night has
taken pains to remind his readers that the police didn't know Paul Stine's
assailant was the Zodiac killer until the following week, when the letter
containing a piece of his shirt was received. What no one has emphasized is
that the police also didn't know they were pursuing a serial killer (or even a
killer, for that matter, when the first APB went out). The police believed they
were pursuing someone who had just held up a cab and had shot the driver in the
course of a robbery.

Serial killers tend to be white males (almost exclusively).

The profile of your typical cab hold-up man is a lot more integrated, if you
know what I mean.

When Fouke explains why he didn't stop the man on Jackson Street, he invariably
mentions that Presidio Heights was an affluent neighborhood. He doesn't just
say, "We were looking for a black male and the pedestrian was white." He says,
"Seeing that it was a white male in an affluent neighborhood walking along the
street, we didn't think it was a suspect."

And, according to Pelissetti's account, the change in color of the APB doesn't
change Fouke's demeanor at all. It isn't that Fouke eliminated the pedestrian
because he was white, and the description was black. It's that Fouke was
looking for a taxi cab stick-up man, and the guy Fouke saw obviously belonged
in the neighborhood. And no one who lived in the neighborhood held up cabs for
a living.

What saved the Zodiac killer wasn't a mistaken description; it was a mistaken
preconception.

Did Michael O'Hare take a chance that night, strolling through the
neighborhood? Maybe he did, but he had to make a couple points before finally
walking off the stage (publicly).


Park

He shoots a man who has just put his cab in PARK.

He talks about the cops searching the PARK properly.

He says, If only the cops had PARKed their cars and just waited for him to come
out of cover.

And several times, he talks about making his way that night into the PARK.

Do any of these references mean anything, or are they all a lot of PARK spelled
backwards?

PP AA RR KK
1166 ++ 11 ++ 1188 ++ 1111 == 4466

Yes, you guessed it, PARK is yet another reference to 2 x 23! But use of the
term points to the basic dichotomy between who the police thought he was that
night, and who he really was. A cab stick-up man, after a botched robbery,
would be stranded, and would have to hide in the PARK. But someone who belonged
in the neighborhood would simply walk to his PARKed car.



Affluent Neighborhood


In Presidio Heights, with the murder of Paul Stine, the Zodiac killer moves
into a better neighborhood. That he takes a cab ride from the theatre district,
and finally disappears, following his last &#8220;public&#8221; murder, into
quiet streets where doctors, lawyers, and other professionals live, should
serve as a hint, both of his theatrical intent, and of the neighborhoods of his
own private life.


Maybe he was lucky that he made it back there safely? Or maybe, like the Dr.
Jeckyll character in Robert Louis Stevenson's TThhee SSttrraannggee CCaassee ooff DDrr.. JJeecckkyyllll
AAnndd MMrr.. HHyyddee, he needed only to reach those quiet streets, even in the midst of
hot pursuit by police after his alter-ego, to escape blind justice, and to
blend in with the upscale scenery?

The reader may laugh at such a melodramatic idea, but I think Michael O'Hare,
as he disappears into the night, is laughing a lot harder.


Presidio Heights Review

The Presidio Heights killing of cab driver Paul Stine was the Zodiac
killer&#8217;s last &#8220;public&#8221; murder&#8212;his remaining four
murders would all be &#8220;secret&#8221;.

As such, his final open killing is packed with information:


11.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr iimmiittaatteedd ppaaggaann rriittuuaall bbyy ssaaccrriiffiicciinngg &&##88222200;;vviirrggiinn&&##88222211;;
vviiccttiimmss..

22.. AAllll vviiccttiimmss wweerree rreeaall oorr nnoommiinnaall vviirrggiinnss&&##88221122;;lliikkee PPaauull SSttiinnee oonn CChheerrrryy
SStt....

33.. HHee hhaacckkeedd SSttiinnee&&##88221177;;ss sshhiirrtt ooffff ssoo hhee ddiiddnn&&##88221177;;tt nneeeedd aa gguunn lliinnkkiinngg hhiiss
ccrriimmeess..

44.. HHee ppuulllleedd SSttiinnee&&##88221177;;ss bbooddyy oovveerr oonnttoo tthhee ppaasssseennggeerr ssiiddee ooff tthhee ffrroonntt sseeaatt..

55.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr ssttrraappppeedd aa TTiimmeexx ssttooppppeedd aatt 11::4466 oonnttoo PPaauull SSttiinnee&&##88221177;;ss
wwrriisstt..

66.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr uusseedd aa ..3388,, NNOOTT aa 99mmmm..,, ttoo kkiillll PPaauull SSttiinnee..

77.. TThhee gguunn nnuummbbeerrss,, rreeaadd iinn sseeqquueennccee,, ssppeellll hhiiss nnaammee bbaacckkwwaarrddss..

88.. 2222--99--4455--3388 ccoonnvveerrttss ttoo aa ffoorrmm ooff hhiiss nnaammee&&##88221122;;EERR//HHOO&&##88221122;;wwhhiicchh iiss aallssoo
2233//2233..

99.. MMiicchhaaeell OO&&##88221177;;HHaarree vvaarriieedd hhiiss mm.. oo.. bbeeccaauussee hhiiss iinniittiiaallss aarree MM.. OO....

1100.. TThhee ccaarr sseeqquueennccee,, ggooiinngg ffoorrwwaarrdd oorr iinn rreevveerrssee,, ssppeellllss oouutt hhiiss DDOOBB..

1111.. HHee ddooeessnn''tt NNEEEEDD aa ddiissgguuiissee iinn PPrreessiiddiioo HHeeiigghhttss;; hhee llooookkss lliikkee hhee bbeelloonnggss
tthheerree..


Robert Graysmith describes the crime scene at Washington & Cherry as having
been lit up like broad daylight.

We now move out of the starlight, and into the dark side of the Zodiac killer.



_S_h_e_l_l_y_ _H_o_l_m_b_o_e




Content copyright
. Raymond Grant. All rights reserved.

_[_W_e_b_ _H_o_s_t_i_n_g_]
