















The Zodiac Murders--Solved!
my other website: _Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _K_i_l_l_e_r_ _T_i_m_e_l_i_n_e
you tube videos:_Z_o_d_i_a_c_ _k_i_l_l_e_r_ _s_o_l_v_e_d
Your Subtitle text
    * _H_o_m_e_ _P_a_g_e
    * _I_n_t_r_o_ _S_e_c_t_i_o_n
    * _R_i_v_e_r_s_i_d_e
    * _V_a_l_l_e_j_o
    * _C_r_y_p_t_o_g_r_a_m
    * _L_a_k_e_ _B_e_r_r_y_e_s_s_a
    * _P_r_e_s_i_d_i_o_ _H_e_i_g_h_t_s
    * _S_h_e_l_l_y_ _H_o_l_m_b_o_e
    * _3_4_0
    * _J_o_h_n_s_ _&_ _S_a_l_e_m
    * _1_9_7_0_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _D_o_n_n_a_ _L_a_s_s
    * _1_9_7_4
    * _1_9_8_0_/_1_9_8_1
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _L_e_t_t_e_r_s
    * _G_a_r_e_t_h_ _P_e_n_n_ _A_r_t_i_c_l_e_s
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_1
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_3_-_2
    * _T_Z_M_S_ _1_9_9_4
    * _W_h_a_t_'_s_ _N_e_w
************ VVaalllleejjoo ************

Most readers will object to the theory behind this book because they believe no
one, and not even a group of people, could plan something so complicated in
such detail so many years in advance. That&#8217;s why I ask the reader to put
any doubts he has on HOLD.

When he refuses to do that, the reader believes he&#8217;s being skeptical.

But he&#8217;s not being skeptical at all&#8212;he&#8217;s actually being
gullible!

Let&#8217;s assume, for a moment, that the reader accompanies me on an evening
out, and we go to see a magician saw his assistant in half, and then wave his
magic wand, and somehow put her back together again (as otherwise she'd be
beside herself). At the end of the evening, the audience applauds the magician.

But did any of us actually think that he'd taken his assistant apart and put
her back together again? Of course not! Instead, we were entertained by THE
ILLUSION the magician created.

The same is true of the Zodiac killer. I don&#8217;t think he did anything
supernatural. Instead, he and his fellow conspirators sought out what he was
looking for in advance, and then chose among various options available to him,
and used a flexible schedule (and, for that matter, a language with lots of
flexibility) to give the appearance of doing the impossible.

I mention this now because what happened in Riverside was relatively
static&#8212;a missing co-ed, a body discovered the morning after, a disabled
car, various artifacts left behind at the scene of the crime--plus the killer
himself is invisible, despite all the potential witnesses that Sunday.

In contrast, in Vallejo, both killer and victims are figures on a shifting
landscape.

At Lake Herman Road he's a passing shadow, barely detectable as an oddly parked
car from earlier in the evening, or the second car in a turnout on a dark road
that a passing motorist's headlights illuminate for just a moment.

At Blue Rock Springs, a surviving victim recalls a mysterious driver lurking,
and then suddenly pulling up behind the couple, walking to the passenger side
and opening fire, and then just as abruptly getting back in his car and driving
away.

How could the Zodiac killer possibly have chosen his victims ahead of time and
then placed them, when the circumstances seem to suggest otherwise?

I don&#8217;t pretend to know the specifics of his &#8220;tricks&#8221;.

But the evidence suggests he was able, somehow, to pull it off.

They say Fortune Favors The Prepared Mind . . . and what he did wasn&#8217;t
magic.


Vallejo Facts

1. On Friday night, December 20, 1968, David Faraday, 17, and Betty Lou Jensen,
16, were shot to death with a .22 rifle in a lovers lane on Lake Herman Road in
Vallejo, California. There were no eyewitnesses; their bodies were discovered
by a passing motorist.

2. The gunman apparently &#8220;herded&#8221; the couple out the passenger side
of the car by firing bullets into the right rear window and the left rear wheel
well. The couple scrambled out the passenger side, where they were shot dead by
the gunman coming around behind them.

3. The killer shot David Faraday point blank in the left temple, then put five
shots in Betty Lou&#8217;s upper chest. This was remarkable marksmanship,
considering he was pursuing her on gravel and the area was pitch dark that time
of night.

4. On the night of July 4-5, 1969, Darlene Ferrin, 22, and a companion, Michael
Mageau, 19, were the victims of another lovers lane shooting, this time in a
clearing near a grove of trees in Blue Rock Springs Park, less than a mile from
the Lake Herman Road murder scene. This time the weapon was a .9mm Luger.
Darlene, the driver, was mortally wounded, but Michael ultimately recovered and
was able to describe his attacker to a police artist.

5. Michael Mageau described Darlene&#8217;s car being &#8220;herded&#8221; into
the area by a motorist who tailgated her until her own Corvair stalled against
a fallen log. When the other driver got out, he shone a flashlight in at them.
Assuming it was the police, they reached for their wallets. The man approached
from the passenger side and began firing in through the window.

6. At 12:40AM, the killer made a phone call to The Vallejo Police Department.
&#8220; I want to report a double murder. If you will go one mile east on the
Columbus Parkway to the public park, you will find kids in a brown car. They
were shot with a 9-millimeter Luger. I also killed those kids last year.
Goodbye.&#8221; The final word was delivered in a taunting tone.

7. For all his nerve, the killer was startled when the pay phone began ringing
as soon as he hung up. This drew the attention of a black man who happened to
be passing the lit phone booth. The killer lifted the receiver and let it hang
to stop it from ringing before exiting the booth.

8. Beginning at 1:30AM, three members of Darlene&#8217;s family--her husband,
his parents, and his brother--all received odd calls in which only the sound of
breathing could be heard, even though there had been no radio or TV news on the
murder as yet.


Vallejo Drivers

I&#8217;ve already discussed the north leg of the Zodiac killer&#8217;s radian,
which runs through both Vallejo crime scenes.



Since we&#8217;ve looked at the geometry of the crimes, let&#8217;s now
consider the human element.

I&#8217;m about to make what the reader may think is a ridiculous observation.
In fact, what I&#8217;m going to say will sound so preposterous, the reader may
be tempted to abandon all hope and say to Hell with it!

But here goes: The significant victims in Vallejo were David Faraday and
Darlene Ferrin.

It&#8217;s not that the Zodiac wasn&#8217;t trying to kill Betty Lou Jensen and
Michael Mageau; obviously, he was. In fact, his failure to kill Michael Mageau
may very well have cost Robert Salem his life.
But the victims who really mattered were the DRIVERS of the two cars.

Why? Let me answer that question by asking another one:

Does the reader notice anything odd about the names of the two drivers?

DDaavviidd FFaarraaddaayy
DDaarrlleennee FFeerrrriinn

That&#8217;s correct. The drivers of the two cars had the same initials.
Yes, I know it sounds absurd, but suspend your disbelief.
Both drivers were &#8216;DF&#8217;s.

DD FF
44 66 ((aallpphhaabbeett nnuummbbeerrss))

Obviously, the number 46 is 2 x 23. If you were trying to make the point that 2
x 23 was a basic theme of your murder puzzle, whom would you choose to kill?
You might want to choose two victims with the initials DF, featured in mirror-
image crimes.

If you think this sounds much too simple, you&#8217;re right.
There is more going on here than meets the eye.


Ferrin Phone Calls

Let&#8217;s begin with something that should be obvious to everyone. In fact,
it&#8217;s so obvious that Robert Graysmith actually notices it, and his
character in the movie mentions it to the Dave Toschi character (I say the
characters mention it because the movie is highly fictionalized).

Someone makes three phone calls, beginning at 1:30am on July 5, 1969:

1, to Dean Ferrin;

2, to Dean&#8217;s parents; and

3, to Dean&#8217;s brother.

The caller says nothing in any of the phone calls, but his breathing can be
heard. The calls, made barely 90 minutes following the murder, cannot be the
result of news accounts of the homicide, since news of the incident had not hit
the airwaves as yet.

It is reasonable to assume the Zodiac made all three calls, particularly since
he was in the habit of making phone calls following his murders.

Note that all three calls were made to people named FERRIN. No one called
Darlene&#8217;s mother, who also lived in the area, even though she was a
relative of the victim. Darlene&#8217;s mother wasn&#8217;t called because her
last name wasn&#8217;t FERRIN.

The Zodiac killer calls to demonstrate that he knew who the victim was. That
much is evident just from the fact of the phone calls. It&#8217;s also why he
shines a flashlight at the victims in Blue Rock Springs Park, something he
probably also did in the earlier episode on Lake Herman Road. The flashlight
serves the dual purpose of freezing the victims (because they assume it&#8217;s
the police, and technically they&#8217;re trespassing) and visually confirming
their identities.

But the three phone calls to people named FERRIN also suggests something else,
something much more sinister. The Zodiac killer is telling us her name is
significant. Her name is why she was chosen as a victim.



Mirror Images

I&#8217;m getting ahead of myself here, but let&#8217;s look at The Cryptogram
cover letters and the August 4, 1969 letter, which is the first time the killer
says, &#8220; This is the Zodiac speaking . . .&#8221;

In The Cryptogram cover letters, he cites the Vallejo crime details
chronologically&#8212;December 20th, then July 4th. On August 4th , he cites
them backward (July 4th, THEN December 20th). He does this to underscore that
the Vallejo crimes are mirror-images of each other (except, of course, for all
those Winchester Western slugs littering the Blue Rock Springs Park crime
scene. The Vallejo crime scenes have to be paired in the context of The Zodiac
Project, because they both lie along the north leg of the radian.

In more than 40 years, no one has commented on the Zodiac killer&#8217;s
switching the order of the crimes in consecutive letters, but he does it to
make a point. Lake Herman Road and Blue Rock Springs are essentially the same
crime.



Alphabetical Order

Again, I have to cite some examples out of their chronological order here, but
this is probably the best place to make this point. If you make the same
assumption I&#8217;m making&#8212;that David Faraday and Darlene Ferrin were
the Zodiac killer's &#8220;real&#8221; intended victims in Vallejo, not Betty
Lou Jensen and/or Michael Mageau, who were literally just along for the
ride&#8212;then something else falls into place. He was attacking his
&#8220;public&#8221; victims in alphabetical order:


BBaatteess,, CChheerrii ((1100--3300--6666))

FFaarraaddaayy,, DDaavviidd ((1122--2200--6688))

FFeerrrriinn,, DDaarrlleennee ((77--44--6699))

HHaarrttnneellll,, BBrryyaann ((99--2277--6699))

SSttiinnee,, PPaauull ((1100--1111--6699))


This is yet another way of saying that the alphabet is important.



Finished Products

We talked about DDaannttee&&##88221177;;ss IInnffeerrnnoo earlier. TThhee IInnffeerrnnoo begins on the night
of Holy Thursday, April 7, 1300 . . . but Dante actually enters Hell on Good
Friday, and comes back up out of Hell on the morning of Easter Sunday.

GGoooodd FFrriiddaayy .. .. .. EEaasstteerr SSuunnddaayy..

Could it be that the Zodiac killer is illustrating this journey in his own
travels? After all, the Zodiac murders all occur on what we in the modern world
think of as a weekend--Friday, Saturday, and Sunday--which corresponds to the
time Dante spends in Hell.

Would it be fair to say Easter is the finished product of DDaannttee&&##88221177;;ss
IInnffeerrnnoo?

And would it be fair to say that the victims--in this case, David Faraday and
Darlene Ferrin--are the finished products of The Zodiac Project? If the Zodiac
killer wanted to make that point, how might he do it?


Hidden Messages

If you think the DFs are a coincidence, note that the names of both drivers
contain the same religious holiday in Morse/binary (actually just redivided
Morse, since no numbers are used):

DD AA VV II DD FF AA RR AA DD AA YY
1100_00_ _00_11_ _00_00_00_11_ _00_00_ _11_0000 00001100 0011 001100 0011 110000 0011 11001111

00 0011 000000 11 00 001100
EE AA SS TT EE RR


DD AA RR LL EE NN EE FF EE RR RR II NN
110000 0011 001100 00110000 00 1100 00 _00_00_11_00_ _00_ _00_11_00_ _00_11_00 0000 1100

00 0011 000000 11 00 001100
EE AA SS TT EE RR

Remember, the Zodiac killer must have chosen Cheri Bates ahead of time--
that&#8217;s why he disabled her car. I think it equally clear that he chose
David and Darlene in advance, and the evidence for that is hidden inside their
names.

As I said in the previous section, Easter is the finished product of
DDaannttee&&##88221177;;ss IInnffeerrnnoo&#8212;it&#8217;s Easter Sunday morning when Dante comes
up out of Hell. And the Easter-victims&#8212;David Faraday and Darlene
Ferrin&#8212;are finished products of the Zodiac murders.

He chose them to make that point.



Code Killer

It's important to realize the Zodiac wasn't just sending codes in his letters.

His murders also contained coding, in the names of the victims and where they
were killed.

If this suggests he was selecting his victims in advance and placing them on
the landscape, that's also true, but he was doing something else as well.

David Faraday and Darlene Ferrin, the two drivers in Vallejo, were both EASTER
victims.

As we'll see in a moment, Michael O'Hare has a connection to Easter spelled out
in two personal identifiers, his Date of Birth and Social Security Number.

Who the victims were didn't decide who he was, of course.

Who he was decided who the victims were.


Binary SSN

Even if David Faraday and Darlene Ferrin did die because the word EASTER was
hidden inside their names, that wouldn&#8217;t necessarily identify Michael
O&#8217;Hare as their killer, would it?

To complete the picture, we need to take a second look at two of Michael
O'Hare&#8217;s identifying numbers, his Social Security Number and his Date Of
Birth.

First, his SSN:

111177--3322--22112288

I decided the most logical way to treat Michael&#8217;s social security number
was as a single number, consisting of the digits in sequence. In other words,
as:

111177,,332222,,112288

In binary math, this converts to the following:

111100111111111111110000001111000000111100001100000000

And it&#8217;s an amazing coincidence, but Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s SSN
begins with the binary form of the number 223:

1111001111111111 11110000001111000000111100001100000000
222233

It&#8217;s almost as if being the Zodiac had been his fate all along!



GOOD 793

The binary form of Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s SSN is

111100111111111111110000001111000000111100001100000000

Besides starting off with 223--

1111001111111111 11110000001111000000111100001100000000
222233

--the SSN contains two other interesting expressions in Morse/binary:

111100111111111111110000 00 11110000001111000011 00000000

111100 111111 111111 110000 11110000001111000011
GG OO OO DD 779933

Let&#8217;s start with the second expression, 793. It&#8217;s another amazing
coincidence--or maybe not such a coincidence--but 793 just happens to be the
total number of characters contained in the four Zodiac ciphers:

TThhee CCrryyppttooggrraamm ((JJuullyy 3311,, 11996699)) 440088 cchhaarraacctteerrss
TThhee 334400 CChhaarraacctteerr CCiipphheerr ((NNoovveemmbbeerr 88,, 11996699)) 334400 cchhaarraacctteerrss
TThhee 1133--CChhaarraacctteerr CCiipphheerr ((AApprriill 2200,, 11997700)) 1133 cchhaarraacctteerrss
TThhee 3322--CChhaarraacctteerr CCiipphheerr ((JJuunnee 2266,, 11997700)) _++_33_22_ _cc_hh_aa_rr_aa_cc_tt_ee_rr_ss
779933 cchhaarraacctteerrss


GOOD Friday

The binary form of Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s SSN is

111100111111111111110000001111000000111100001100000000

--which contains two interesting expressions in Morse/binary:

111100111111111111110000 00 11110000001111000011 00000000

111100 111111 111111 110000 11110000001111000011
GG OO OO DD 779933

793 is the total number of cipher characters used by the Zodiac, but GOOD is
still the more significant expression of the two.

What is Michael O&#8217;Hare&#8217;s connection to the EASTER victims?

His social security number begins with GOOD.
And Michael O&#8217;Hare was born on January 22, 1943--a FRIDAY.

Michael O&#8217;Hare is GOOD (Friday).
His victims are EASTER (Sunday).

Together, killer and victims encompass his vision of HELL.



Passengers

At Lake Herman Road, the Zodiac killer herded the teenagers out the PASSENGER
side of the vehicle, and then immediately struck, shooting David Faraday in the
temple and firing five shots into Betty Lou Jensen&#8217;s back. At Blue Rock
Springs Park, the killer simply walked up to the PASSENGER side and began
firing into the vehicle.

Subsequently, in Presidio Heights, the Zodiac killer will grab the driver from
the back seat, press a gun against his head and fire one bullet through his
skull, after which he will get into the front seat on the PASSENGER side and
pull the victim&#8217;s body onto the PASSENGER seat.

Why this preoccupation with the PASSENGER side of each vehicle?
Volkswagen&#8217;s current ad campaign points out that, in life, there are
drivers and passengers, and concludes with a statement you might see on a sign
in the window of a pizza joint: DRIVERS WANTED.

It&#8217;s also true that in death, there are drivers and passengers. Killers
are the drivers. Victims are the passengers, particularly if they&#8217;re
chosen ahead of time. So the Zodiac killer is demonstrating that, though the
victims may APPEAR to be self-directed in their movements, they are actually
being positioned by him: positioned in space, positioned in time, positioned as
pieces of the puzzle.

The subsequent murders had more elements of his staging. He puts on a costume,
forces the victims at Lake Berryessa to tie each other up . . . and then stabs
them and leaves a message on their car. He has Paul Stine first drive to
Washington & Maple, and then another block to Washington & Cherry . . . and
THEN kills him.

In the solution to The Cryptogram, which I&#8217;ll be discussing momentarily,
the Zodiac killer says

TThhee bbeesstt ppaarrtt ooff iitt iiss tthhaaee wwhheenn II ddiiee II wwiillll bbee rreebboorrnn iinn ppaarraaddiiccee aanndd aallll tthhee
II hhaavvee kkiilllleedd wwiillll bbeeccoommee mmyy ssllaavveess..

What could he mean by that? How could his victims becomes his slaves after he
dies?

They will become his slaves then because, once he dies, it will become clear
that he chose all his victims in advance.

They will thus become completely subservient to his will, and without lives of
their own to speak of. He will be the driver; they will be the passengers.



Original Terminator

Oh, I know what you&#8217;re muttering to yourself, reader. No one, not even
the brightest serial killer who ever lived, could pick his victims ahead of
time BY NAME, and then kill them at predetermined locations. It simply
can&#8217;t be done.

Well, at the very least, this idea isn't inconceivable. The Terminator robot
did it in the original movie. He materialized in Los Angeles, got a phone book,
looked up the name &#8216;Sarah Connor&#8217;, and began showing up at each
Sarah Connor&#8217;s front door and killing her. Sooner or later, he was going
to kill the &#8220;real&#8221; one!

So how did the Zodiac killer locate people with names that fit his design, and
then somehow place them on the landscape? The locating wouldn&#8217;t have been
that hard, if you stop to realize that he wasn&#8217;t looking for specific
people.

He was looking for people with names that fit his requirements.

And, if you believe what I believe, that the Zodiac killer was actually four
people, you&#8217;ll notice that one of those people was Hugh Penn.

Hugh Penn, Gareth Penn's father, worked in law enforcement, and was a long-time
employee of the California Highway Patrol. As such, he had access to whatever
information his department had access to.

Robert Graysmith noticed that the Zodiac killer favored crime venues with
&#8220;water&#8221; names (LAKE Herman Road, Blue Rock SPRINGS, etc.).

What no one has noticed, in 40+ years of the Zodiac case, is that all his
victims&#8212;the public ones, anyway&#8212;were strongly associated, at the
time of their deaths, to a vehicle:

Cheri Bates&#8217;s VW was tampered with by her killer.

David Faraday and Betty Lou Jensen were herded out of their Rambler.

Darlene Ferrin was shot through the passenger side door of her car.

The Zodiac killer wrote a message on Bryan Hartnell&#8217;s car.

Paul Stine was killed at the wheel of his taxi.

Whether or not he knew THEM, he definitely seemed to know their cars.

How? If you&#8217;re a supervisor for the CHP, you know everybody&#8217;s car
and everybody&#8217;s driver&#8217;s licence. You have their addresses, and you
know their licence plate numbers (plus the make and model of the cars they
drive).

But that just gets you their names, home addresses, and vehicles.

It doesn&#8217;t put them where you need them to be.



Scouting Locations

Before I account for the WHERE, I need to remind the reader that the Zodiac
killer didn&#8217;t murder specific people. He murdered individuals whose NAMES
happened to fit his requirements.

In July 1970, he sent The Mikado Letter, in which he admits to having A Little
List of potential victims. I think it&#8217;s probably more accurate to say he
was keeping some sort of chart, a kind of spreadsheet, which included potential
victims, potential murder locations, and so forth.

It would have required some serious homework, but it wouldn't have been all
that difficult. If you have access to motor vehicle registrations and
driver&#8217;s license information, your ability to locate someone at any given
time is greatly enhanced. Just a little bit of legwork, following up on those
leads, will give you some familiar patterns to work with.

For example, I doubt that Darlene Ferrin&#8217;s presence that evening in Blue
Rock Springs Park was her first-ever trip there. I&#8217;m guessing that, like
the car-hop place she drives to first in the movie, it was a regular haunt of
hers. That might also explain the familiarity she seemed to have with the
person stalking her; she&#8217;d probably seen that car around before.

It might also explain why the Zodiac killer appeared to prey on younger
victims. Teenagers and college-age kids are a bit more predictable in their
patterns than adults are; it would have been much easier for the Zodiac killer
to get a &#8220;fix&#8221; on a younger person, plus they tend to be a lot more
oblivious to their surroundings than suspicious adults are.

In the 1960s, around the time The Zodiac Project was being planned, there was a
very popular type of puzzle, often found in Reader&#8217;s Digest, where one
received scattered information about a handful of people. The puzzle itself
would consist of perhaps twenty statements, such as: David drives a Rambler;
Darlene smokes Chesterfields; The Person Who Lives On Via San Jose drives a
Volkswagen. You had to make a chart to solve it, and it usually took the better
part of an evening to figure it all out (largely by a process of elimination,
since the puzzle would finally ask, "Who drives a Corvair?", or, "Whose is
Cecelia's boy friend?"). In the end, you'd have a complete profile for each
person.

I suspect that&#8217;s what the Zodiac killer was able to do: he kept track of
various requirements (name, address, car, and so forth), and finally chose
whatever was the best combination (or what was available at a given time). It
wasn't magic, but when you removed the scaffolding that supported it, something
that was carefully planned was made to seem spontaneous.

Choosing among various elements in a work of art, even when the artwork itself
is open-ended and even interactive with its environment, is part of the
creative process.



Vallejo Review

Let&#8217;s review what we&#8217;ve learned on our trip to the North Bay Area.

Since there were two crime scenes, I&#8217;ll make two points with each
section.


11aa.. BBootthh VVaalllleejjoo ddrriivveerrss hhaadd tthhee iinniittiiaallss DDFF..

11bb.. TThhee lleetttteerrss DD--FF ssttaanndd ffoorr 44--66,, oorr 4466,, wwhhiicchh iiss 22 xx 2233..

22aa.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr rreevveerrsseedd tthhee oorrddeerr ooff tthhee ccrriimmee ddeettaaiillss iinn ccoonnsseeccuuttiivvee
lleetttteerrss..

22bb.. TThhee oorrddeerr iiss rreevveerrsseedd ttoo eemmpphhaassiizzee tthhaatt tthhee ccrriimmeess aarree mmiirrrroorr--iimmaaggeess..

33aa.. EEaasstteerr SSuunnddaayy iiss tthhee ffiinniisshheedd pprroodduucctt ooffDDaannttee&&##88221177;;ss IInnffeerrnnoo..

33bb.. FFaarraaddaayy aanndd FFeerrrriinn aarree ffiinniisshheedd pprroodduuccttss ooff TThhee ZZooddiiaacc PPrroojjeecctt..

44aa.. TThhee nnaammeess ooff bbootthh ddrriivveerrss ccoonnttaaiinn tthhee wwoorrdd EEAASSTTEERR iinn MMoorrssee ccooddee..

44bb.. IItt iiss nnooww cclleeaarr tthhaatt tthhee VVaalllleejjoo ddrriivveerrss wweerree cchhoosseenn wweellll iinn aaddvvaannccee..

55aa.. MMiicchhaaeell OO&&##88221177;;HHaarree&&##88221177;;ss SSSSNN ccoonnttaaiinnss GGOOOODD,, aanndd hhee wwaass bboorrnn oonn aa
FFrriiddaayy..

55bb.. MMiicchhaaeell OO&&##88221177;;HHaarree iiss GGOOOODD FFrriiddaayy;; hhiiss vviiccttiimmss aarree EEAASSTTEERR SSuunnddaayy..

66aa.. PPrreeooccccuuppaattiioonn wwiitthh tthhee ppaasssseennggeerr ssiiddee mmeeaannss hhiiss vviiccttiimmss wweerree ppllaacceedd..

66bb.. TThhee ZZooddiiaacc kkiilllleerr ccaallllss hhiiss vviiccttiimmss SSLLAAVVEESS ttoo ssttrreessss tthheeyy wweerreenn&&##88221177;;tt
rraannddoomm..



_C_r_y_p_t_o_g_r_a_m

Content copyright
. Raymond Grant. All rights reserved.

_[_W_e_b_ _H_o_s_t_i_n_g_]
